Atomic Kotlin
Bruce Eckel and Svetlana Isakova

This book is for sale at http://leanpub.com/AtomicKotlin
This version was published on 2020-12-21

* * * * *
This is a Leanpub book. Leanpub empowers authors and publishers with the
Lean Publishing process. Lean Publishing is the act of publishing an inprogress ebook using lightweight tools and many iterations to get reader
feedback, pivot until you have the right book and build traction once you
do.
* * * * *
© 2020 Mindview LLC
ISBN for EPUB version: 978-0-9818725-4-4
ISBN for MOBI version: 978-0-9818725-4-4

Table of Contents
Copyright

Section I: Programming Basics
Introduction
Why Kotlin?
Hello, World!
var & val
Data Types
Functions
if Expressions
String Templates
Number Types
Booleans
Repetition with while
Looping & Ranges
The in Keyword
Expressions & Statements
Summary 1

Section II: Introduction to Objects
Objects Everywhere
Creating Classes
Properties
Constructors
Constraining Visibility
Packages
Testing
Exceptions
Lists
Variable Argument Lists
Sets

Maps
Property Accessors
Summary 2

Section III: Usability

Extension Functions
Named & Default Arguments
Overloading
when Expressions
Enumerations
Data Classes
Destructuring Declarations
Nullable Types
Safe Calls & the Elvis Operator
Non-Null Assertions
Extensions for Nullable Types
Introduction to Generics
Extension Properties
break & continue

Section IV: Functional Programming
Lambdas
The Importance of Lambdas
Operations on Collections
Member References
Higher-Order Functions
Manipulating Lists
Building Maps
Sequences
Local Functions
Folding Lists
Recursion

Section V: Object-Oriented Programming
Interfaces

Complex Constructors
Secondary Constructors
Inheritance
Base Class Initialization
Abstract Classes
Upcasting
Polymorphism
Composition
Inheritance & Extensions
Class Delegation
Downcasting
Sealed Classes
Type Checking
Nested Classes
Objects
Inner Classes
Companion Objects

Section VI: Preventing Failure
Exception Handling
Check Instructions
The Nothing Type
Resource Cleanup
Logging
Unit Testing

Section VII: Power Tools

Extension Lambdas
Scope Functions
Creating Generics
Operator Overloading
Using Operators
Property Delegation
Property Delegation Tools
Lazy Initialization

Late Initialization

Appendices

Appendix A: AtomicTest
Appendix B: Java Interoperability

Copyright
Atomic Kotlin
By Bruce Eckel, President, MindView, LLC, and Svetlana Isakova,
JetBrains sro.
Copyright ©2021, MindView LLC.
eBook ISBN 978-0-9818725-4-4
Print Book ISBN 978-0-9818725-5-1
The eBook ISBN covers the Stepik and Leanpub eBook distributions, both
available through AtomicKotlin.com.
Please purchase this book through www.AtomicKotlin.com, to support
its continued maintenance and updates.
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. This
publication is protected by copyright, and permission must be obtained
from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a
retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise. For information
regarding permissions, see AtomicKotlin.com.
Created in Crested Butte, Colorado, USA, and Munich, Germany.
Text printed in the United States
Ebook: Version 1.0, December 2020
First printing January 2021

Cover design by Daniel Will-Harris, www.Will-Harris.com
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish
their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear
in this book, and the publisher was aware of a trademark claim, the
designations are printed with initial capital letters or in all capitals.
The Kotlin trademark belongs to the Kotlin Foundation. Java is a trademark
or registered trademark of Oracle, Inc. in the United States and other
countries. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation in
the United States and other countries. All other product names and
company names mentioned herein are the property of their respective
owners.
The authors and publisher have taken care in the preparation of this book,
but make no expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assume no
responsibility for errors or omissions. No liability is assumed for incidental
or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of the use of the
information or programs contained herein.
Visit us at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Source Code
All the source code for this book is available as copyrighted freeware,
distributed via Github. To ensure you have the most current version, this is
the official code distribution site. You may use this code in classroom and
other educational situations as long as you cite this book as the source.
The primary goal of this copyright is to ensure that the source of the code is
properly cited, and to prevent you from republishing the code without
permission. (As long as this book is cited, using examples from the book in
most media is generally not a problem.)
In each source-code file you find a reference to the following copyright
notice:
// Copyright.txt
This computer source code is Copyright ©2021 MindView LLC.
All Rights Reserved.

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this
computer source code (Source Code) and its documentation
without fee and without a written agreement for the
purposes set forth below is hereby granted, provided that
the above copyright notice, this paragraph and the
following five numbered paragraphs appear in all copies.
1. Permission is granted to compile the Source Code and to
include the compiled code, in executable format only, in
personal and commercial software programs.
2. Permission is granted to use the Source Code without
modification in classroom situations, including in
presentation materials, provided that the book "Atomic
Kotlin" is cited as the origin.
3. Permission to incorporate the Source Code into printed
media may be obtained by contacting:
MindView LLC, PO Box 969, Crested Butte, CO 81224
MindViewInc@gmail.com
4. The Source Code and documentation are copyrighted by
MindView LLC. The Source code is provided without express
or implied warranty of any kind, including any implied
warranty of merchantability, fitness for a particular
purpose or non-infringement. MindView LLC does not
warrant that the operation of any program that includes the
Source Code will be uninterrupted or error-free. MindView
LLC makes no representation about the suitability of the
Source Code or of any software that includes the Source
Code for any purpose. The entire risk as to the quality
and performance of any program that includes the Source
Code is with the user of the Source Code. The user
understands that the Source Code was developed for research
and instructional purposes and is advised not to rely
exclusively for any reason on the Source Code or any
program that includes the Source Code. Should the Source
Code or any resulting software prove defective, the user
assumes the cost of all necessary servicing, repair, or
correction.
5. IN NO EVENT SHALL MINDVIEW LLC, OR ITS PUBLISHER BE
LIABLE TO ANY PARTY UNDER ANY LEGAL THEORY FOR DIRECT,
INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES,
INCLUDING LOST PROFITS, BUSINESS INTERRUPTION, LOSS OF
BUSINESS INFORMATION, OR ANY OTHER PECUNIARY LOSS, OR FOR
PERSONAL INJURIES, ARISING OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOURCE
CODE AND ITS DOCUMENTATION, OR ARISING OUT OF THE INABILITY
TO USE ANY RESULTING PROGRAM, EVEN IF MINDVIEW LLC, OR
ITS PUBLISHER HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE. MINDVIEW LLC SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIMS ANY
WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE. THE SOURCE CODE AND DOCUMENTATION PROVIDED
HEREUNDER IS ON AN "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT ANY ACCOMPANYING
SERVICES FROM MINDVIEW LLC, AND MINDVIEW LLC HAS NO
OBLIGATIONS TO PROVIDE MAINTENANCE, SUPPORT, UPDATES,
ENHANCEMENTS, OR MODIFICATIONS.

Please note that MindView LLC maintains a Web site which is
the sole distribution point for electronic copies of the
Source Code, where it is freely available under the terms
stated above:
https://github.com/BruceEckel/AtomicKotlinExamples
If you think you've found an error in the Source Code,
please submit a correction at:
https://github.com/BruceEckel/AtomicKotlinExamples/issues

You may use the code in your projects and in the classroom (including your
presentation materials) as long as the copyright notice that appears in each
source file is retained.

SECTION I: PROGRAMMING BASICS
There was something amazingly enticing about programming—Vint
Cerf
This section is for readers who are learning to program. If you’re an
experienced programmer, skip forward to Summary 1 and Summary 2.

Introduction
This book is for dedicated novices and experienced programmers.
You’re a novice if you don’t have prior programming knowledge, but
“dedicated” because we give you just enough to figure it out on your own.
When you’re finished, you’ll have a solid foundation in programming and
in Kotlin.
If you’re an experienced programmer, skip forward to Summary 1 and
Summary 2, then proceed from there.
The “Atomic” part of the book title refers to atoms as the smallest
indivisible units. In this book, we try to introduce only one concept per
chapter, so the chapters cannot be further subdivided—thus we call them
atoms.

Concepts
All programming languages consist of features. You apply these features to
produce results. Kotlin is powerful—not only does it have a rich set of
features, but you can usually express those features in numerous ways.
If everything is dumped on you too quickly, you might come away thinking
Kotlin is “too complicated.”
This book attempts to prevent overwhelm. We teach you the language
carefully and deliberately, using the following principles:
1. Baby steps and small wins. We cast off the tyranny of the chapter.
Instead, we present each small step as an atomic concept or simply
atom, which looks like a tiny chapter. We try to present only one new
concept per atom. A typical atom contains one or more small, runnable
pieces of code and the output it produces.

2. No forward references. As much as possible, we avoid saying,
“These features are explained in a later atom.”
3. No references to other programming languages. We do so only
when necessary. An analogy to a feature in a language you don’t
understand isn’t helpful.
4. Show don’t tell. Instead of verbally describing a feature, we prefer
examples and output. It’s better to see a feature in code.
5. Practice before theory. We try to show the mechanics of the language
first, then tell why those features exist. This is backwards from
“traditional” teaching, but it often seems to work better.
If you know the features, you can work out the meaning. It’s usually easier
to understand a single page of Kotlin than it is to understand the equivalent
code in another language.

Where Is the Index?
This book is written in Markdown and produced with Leanpub.
Unfortunately, neither Markdown nor Leanpub supports indexes. However,
by creating the smallest-possible chapters (atoms) consisting of a single
topic in each atom, the table of contents acts as a kind of index. In addition,
the eBook versions allow for electronic searching across the book.

Cross-References
A reference to an atom in the book looks like this: Introduction, which in
this case refers to the current atom. In the various eBook formats, this
produces a hyperlink to that atom.

Formatting
In this book:
Italics introduce a new term or concept, and sometimes emphasize an
idea.
Fixed-width font indicates program keywords, identifiers and file
names. The code examples are also in this font, and are colorized in
the eBook versions of the book.

In prose, we follow a function name with empty parentheses, as in
func(). This reminds the reader they are looking at a function.
To make the eBook easy to read on all devices and allow the user to
increase the font size, we limit our code listing width to 47 characters.
At times this requires compromise, but we feel the results are worth it.
To achieve these widths we may remove spaces that might otherwise
be included in many formatting styles—in particular, we use two-space
indents rather than the standard four spaces.

Sample the Book
We provide a free sample of the electronic book at AtomicKotlin.com. The
sample includes the first two sections in their entirety, along with several
subsequent atoms. This way you can try out the book and decide if it’s a
good fit for you.
The complete book is for sale, both as a print book and an eBook. If you
like what we’ve done in the free sample, please support us and help us
continue our work by paying for what you use. We hope the book helps, and
we appreciate your sponsorship.
In the age of the Internet, it doesn’t seem possible to control any piece of
information. You’ll probably find the electronic version of this book in
numerous places. If you are unable to pay for the book right now and you
do download it from one of these sites, please “pay it forward.” For
example, help someone else learn the language once you’ve learned it. Or
help someone in any way they need. Perhaps in the future you’ll be better
off, and then you can pay for the book.

Exercises and Solutions
Most atoms in Atomic Kotlin are accompanied by a handful of small
exercises. To improve your understanding, we recommend solving the
exercises immediately after reading the atom. Most of the exercises are
checked automatically by the JetBrains IntelliJ IDEA integrated
development environment (IDE), so you can see your progress and get hints
if you get stuck.

You can find the following links at http://AtomicKotlin.com/exercises/.
To solve the exercises, install IntelliJ IDEA with the Edu Tools plugin by
following these tutorials:
1. Install IntelliJ IDEA and the EduTools Plugin.
2. Open the Atomic Kotlin course and solve the exercises.
In the course, you’ll find solutions for all exercises. If you’re stuck on an
exercise, check for hints or try peeking at the solution. We still recommend
implementing it yourself.
If you have any problems setting up and running the course, please read
The Troubleshooting Guide. If that doesn’t solve your problem, please
contact the support team as mentioned in the guide.
If you find a mistake in the course content (for example, a test for a task
produces the wrong result), please use our issue tracker to report the
problem with this prefilled form. Note that you’ll need to log in into
YouTrack. We appreciate your time in helping to improve the course!

Seminars
You can find information about live seminars and other learning tools at
AtomicKotlin.com.

Conferences
Bruce creates Open-Spaces conferences such as the Winter Tech Forum.
Join the mailing list at AtomicKotlin.com to stay informed about our
activities and where we are speaking.

Support Us
This was a big project. It took time and effort to produce this book and
accompanying support materials. If you enjoy this book and want to see
more things like it, please support us:

Blog, tweet, etc. and tell your friends. This is a grassroots marketing
effort so everything you do will help.
Purchase an eBook or print version of this book at
AtomicKotlin.com.
Check AtomicKotlin.com for other support products or events.

About Us
Bruce Eckel is the author of the multi-award-winning Thinking in Java and
Thinking in C++, and a number of other books on computer programming
including Atomic Scala. He’s given hundreds of presentations throughout
the world and puts on alternative conferences and events like the Winter
Tech Forum and developer retreats. Bruce has a BS in applied physics and
an MS in computer engineering. His blog is at www.BruceEckel.com and
his consulting, training and conference business is Mindview LLC.
Svetlana Isakova began as a member of the Kotlin compiler team, and is
now a developer advocate for JetBrains. She teaches Kotlin and speaks at
conferences worldwide, and is coauthor of the book Kotlin in Action.

Acknowledgements
The Kotlin Language Design Team and contributors.
The developers of Leanpub, which made publishing this book so much
easier.

Dedications
For my beloved father, E. Wayne Eckel. April 1, 1924—November 23,
2016. You first taught me about machines, tools, and design.
For my father, Sergey Lvovich Isakov, who passed away so early and who
we will always miss.

About the Cover
Daniel Will-Harris designed the cover based on the Kotlin logo.

Why Kotlin?
We give an overview of the historical development of programming
languages so you can understand where Kotlin fits and why you might
want to learn it. This atom introduces some topics which, if you are a
novice, might seem too complicated right now. Feel free to skip this
atom and come back to it after you’ve read more of the book.
Programs must be written for people to read, and only incidentally for
machines to execute.—Harold Abelson, Structure and Interpretation of
Computer Programs
Programming language design is an evolutionary path from serving the
needs of the machine to serving the needs of the programmer.
A programming language is invented by a language designer and
implemented as one or more programs that act as tools for using the
language. The implementer is usually the language designer, at least
initially.
Early languages focused on hardware limitations. As computers become
more powerful, newer languages shift toward more sophisticated
programming with an emphasis on reliability. These languages can choose
features based on the psychology of programming.
Every programming language is a collection of experiments. Historically,
programming language design has been a succession of guesses and
assumptions about what will make programmers more productive. Some of
those experiments fail, some are mildly successful and some are very
successful.
We learn from the experiments in each new language. Some languages
address issues that turn out to be incidental rather than essential, or the
environment changes (faster processors, cheaper memory, new

understanding of programming and languages) and that issue becomes less
important or even inconsequential. If those ideas become obsolete and the
language doesn’t evolve, it fades from use.
The original programmers worked directly with numbers representing
processor machine instructions. This approach produced numerous errors,
and assembly language was created to replace the numbers with mnemonic
opcodes—words that programmers could more easily remember and read,
along with other helpful tools. However, there was still a one-to-one
correspondence between assembly-language instructions and machine
instructions, and programmers had to write each line of assembly code. In
addition, each computer processor used its own distinct assembly language.
Developing programs in assembly language is exceedingly expensive.
Higher-level languages help solve that problem by creating a level of
abstraction away from low-level assembly languages.

Compilers and Interpreters
Kotlin is compiled rather than interpreted. The instructions of an interpreted
language are executed directly by a separate program called an interpreter.
In contrast, the source code of a compiled language is converted into a
different representation that runs as its own program, either directly on a
hardware processor or on a virtual machine that emulates a processor:

Languages such as C, C++, Go and Rust compile into machine code that
runs directly on the underlying hardware central processing unit (CPU).
Languages like Java and Kotlin compile into bytecode which is an
intermediate-level format that doesn’t run directly on the hardware CPU,
but instead on a virtual machine, which is a program that executes bytecode
instructions. The JVM version of Kotlin runs on the Java Virtual Machine
(JVM).
Portability is an important benefit of a virtual machine. The same bytecode
can run on every computer that has a virtual machine. Virtual machines can
be optimized for particular hardware and to solve speed problems. The
JVM contains many years of such optimizations, and has been implemented
on many platforms.
At compile time, the code is checked by the compiler to discover compiletime errors. (IntelliJ IDEA and other development environments highlight
these errors when you input the code, so you can quickly discover and fix
any problems). If there are no compile-time errors, the source code will be
compiled into bytecode.
A runtime error cannot be detected at compile time, so it only emerges
when you run the program. Typically, runtime errors are more difficult to

discover and more expensive to fix. Statically-typed languages like Kotlin
discover as many errors as possible at compile time, while dynamic
languages perform their safety checks at runtime (some dynamic languages
don’t perform as many safety checks as they might).

Languages that Influenced Kotlin
Kotlin draws its ideas and features from many languages, and those
languages were influenced by earlier languages. It’s helpful to know some
programming-language history to gain perspective on how we got to Kotlin.
The languages described here are chosen for their influence on the
languages that followed them. All these languages ultimately inspired the
design of Kotlin, sometimes by being an example of what not to do.

FORTRAN: FORmula TRANslation (1957)
Designed for use by scientists and engineers, Fortran’s goal was to make it
easier to encode equations. Finely-tuned and tested Fortran libraries are still
in use today, but they are typically “wrapped” to make them callable from
other languages.

LISP: LISt Processor (1958)
Rather than being application-specific, LISP embodied essential
programming concepts; it was the computer scientist’s language and the
first functional programming language (You’ll learn about functional
programming in this book). The tradeoff for its power and flexibility was
efficiency: LISP was typically too expensive to run on early machines, and
only in recent decades have machines become fast enough to produce a
resurgence in the use of LISP. For example, the GNU Emacs editor is
written entirely in LISP, and can be extended using LISP.

ALGOL: ALGOrithmic Language (1958)
Arguably the most influential of the 1950’s languages because it introduced
syntax that persisted in many subsequent languages. For example, C and its
derivatives are “ALGOL-like” languages.

COBOL: COmmon Business-Oriented Language (1959)

Designed for business, finance, and administrative data processing. It has an
English-like syntax, and was intended to be self-documenting and highly
readable. Although this intent generally failed—COBOL is famous for bugs
introduced by a misplaced period—the US Department of Defense forced
widespread adoption on mainframe computers, and systems are still running
(and requiring maintenance) today.

BASIC: Beginners’ All-purpose Symbolic Instruction
Code (1964)
BASIC was one of the early attempts to make programming accessible.
While very successful, its features and syntax were limited, so it was only
partly helpful for people who needed to learn more sophisticated languages.
It is predominantly an interpreted language, which means that to run it you
need the original code for the program. Despite that, many useful programs
were written in BASIC, in particular as a scripting language for Microsoft’s
“Office” products. BASIC might even be thought of as the first “open”
programming language, as people made numerous variations of it.

Simula 67, the Original Object-Oriented Language (1967)
A simulation typically involves many “objects” interacting with each other.
Different objects have different characteristics and behaviors. Languages
that existed at the time were awkward to use for simulations, so Simula
(another “ALGOL-like” language) was developed to provide direct support
for creating simulation objects. It turns out that these ideas are also useful
for general-purpose programming, and this was the genesis of ObjectOriented (OO) languages.

Pascal (1970)
Pascal increased compilation speed by restricting the language so it could
be implemented as a single-pass compiler. The language forced the
programmer to structure their code in a particular way and imposed
somewhat awkward and less-readable constraints on program organization.
As processors became faster, memory cheaper, and compiler technology
better, the impact of these constraints became too costly.

An implementation of Pascal, Turbo Pascal from Borland, initially worked
on CP/M machines and then made the move to early MS-DOS (precursor to
Windows), later evolving into the Delphi language for Windows. By putting
everything in memory, Turbo Pascal compiled at lightning speeds on very
underpowered machines, dramatically improving the programming
experience. Its creator, Anders Hejlsberg, later went on to design both C#
and TypeScript.
Niklaus Wirth, the inventor of Pascal, created subsequent languages:
Modula, Modula-2 and Oberon. As the name implies, Modula focused on
dividing programs into modules, for better organization and faster
compilation. Most modern languages support separate compilation and
some form of module system.

C (1972)
Despite the increasing number of higher-level languages, programmers
were still writing assembly language. This is often called systems
programming, because it is done at the level of the operating system, but it
also includes embedded programming for dedicated physical devices. This
is not only arduous and expensive (Bruce began his career writing assembly
language for embedded systems), but it isn’t portable—assembly language
can only run on the processor it is written for. C was designed to be a “highlevel assembly language” that is still close enough to the hardware that you
rarely need to write assembly. More importantly, a C program runs on any
processor with a C compiler. C decoupled the program from the processor,
which solved a huge and expensive problem. As a result, former assemblylanguage programmers could be vastly more productive in C. C has been so
effective that recent languages (notably Go and Rust) are still attempting to
usurp it for systems programming.

Smalltalk (1972)
Designed from the beginning to be purely object-oriented, Smalltalk
significantly moved OO and language theory forward by being a platform
for experimentation and demonstrating rapid application development.
However, it was created when languages were still proprietary, and the
entry price for a Smalltalk system could be in the thousands. It was

interpreted, so you needed a Smalltalk environment to run programs. Opensource Smalltalk implementations did not appear until after the
programming world had moved on. Smalltalk programmers have
contributed great insights benefitting later OO languages like C++ and Java.

C++: A Better C with Objects (1983)
Bjarne Stroustrup created C++ because he wanted a better C and he wanted
support for the object-oriented constructs he had experienced while using
Simula-67. Bruce was a member of the C++ Standards Committee for its
first eight years, and wrote three books on C++ including Thinking in C++.
Backwards-compatibility with C was a foundational principle of C++
design, so C code can be compiled in C++ with virtually no changes. This
provided an easy migration path—programmers could continue to program
in C, receive the benefits of C++, and slowly experiment with C++ features
while still being productive. Most criticisms of C++ can be traced to the
constraint of backwards compatibility with C.
One of the problems with C was the issue of memory management. The
programmer must first acquire memory, then run an operation using that
memory, then release the memory. Forgetting to release memory is called a
memory leak and can result in using up the available memory and crashing
the process. The initial version of C++ made some innovations in this area,
along with constructors to ensure proper initialization. Later versions of the
language have made significant improvements in memory management.

Python: Friendly and Flexible (1990)
Python’s designer, Guido Van Rossum, created the language based on his
inspiration of “programming for everyone.” His nurturing of the Python
community has given it the reputation of being the friendliest and most
supportive community in the programming world. Python was one of the
first open-source languages, resulting in implementations on virtually every
platform including embedded systems and machine learning. Its dynamism
and ease-of-use makes it ideal for automating small, repetitive tasks but its
features also support the creation of large, complex programs.

Python is a true “grass-roots” language; it never had a company promoting
it and the attitude of its fans was to never push the language, but simply to
help anyone learn it who wants to. The language continues to steadily
improve, and in recent years its popularity has skyrocketed.
Python may have been the first mainstream language to combine functional
and OO programming. It predated Java with automatic memory
management using garbage collection (you typically never have to allocate
or release memory yourself) and the ability to run programs on multiple
platforms.

Haskell: Pure Functional Programming (1990)
Inspired by Miranda (1985), a proprietary language, Haskell was created as
an open standard for pure functional programming research, although it has
also been used for products. Syntax and ideas from Haskell have influenced
a number of subsequent languages including Kotlin.

Java: Virtual Machines and Garbage Collection (1995)
James Gosling and his team were given the task of writing code for a TV
set-top box. They decided they didn’t like C++ and instead of creating the
box, created the Java language. The company, Sun Microsystems, put an
enormous marketing push behind the free language (still a new idea at the
time) to attempt domination of the emerging Internet landscape.
This perceived time window for Internet domination put a lot of pressure on
Java language design, resulting in a significant number of flaws (The book
Thinking in Java illuminates these flaws so readers are prepared to cope
with them). Brian Goetz at Oracle, the current lead developer of Java, has
made remarkable and surprising improvements in Java despite the
constraints he inherited. Although Java was remarkably successful, an
important Kotlin design goal is to fix Java’s flaws so programmers can be
more productive.
Java’s success came from two innovative features: a virtual machine and
garbage collection. These were available in other languages—for example,
LISP, Smalltalk and Python have garbage collection and UCSD Pascal ran

on a virtual machine—but they were never considered practical for
mainstream languages. Java changed that, and in doing so made
programmers significantly more productive.
A virtual machine is an intermediate layer between the language and the
hardware. The language doesn’t have to generate machine code for a
particular processor; it only needs to generate an intermediate language
(bytecode) that runs on the virtual machine. Virtual machines require
processing power and, before Java, were believed to be impractical. The
Java Virtual Machine (JVM) gave rise to Java’s slogan “write once, run
everywhere.” In addition, other languages can be more easily developed by
targeting the JVM; examples include Groovy, a Java-like scripting
language, and Clojure, a version of LISP.
Garbage collection solves the problem of forgetting to release memory, or
when it’s difficult to know when a piece of storage is no longer used.
Projects have been significantly delayed or even cancelled because of
memory leaks. Although garbage collection appears in some prior
languages, it was believed to produce an unacceptable amount of overhead
until Java demonstrated its practicality.

JavaScript: Java in Name Only (1995)
The original Web browser simply copied and displayed pages from a Web
server. Web browsers proliferated, becoming a new programming platform
that needed language support. Java wanted to be this language but was too
awkward for the job. JavaScript began as LiveScript and was built into
NetScape Navigator, one of the first Web browsers. Renaming it to
JavaScript was a marketing ploy by NetScape, as the language has only a
vague similarity to Java.
As the Web took off, JavaScript became tremendously important. However,
the behavior of JavaScript was so unpredictable that Douglas Crockford
wrote a book with the tongue-in-cheek title JavaScript, the Good Parts,
where he demonstrated all the problems with the language so programmers
could avoid them. Subsequent improvements by the ECMAScript
committee have made JavaScript unrecognizeable to an original JavaScript
programmer. It is now considered a stable and mature language.

Web assembly (WASM) was derived from JavaScript to be a kind of
bytecode for web browsers. It often runs much faster than JavaScript and
can be generated by other languages. At this writing, the Kotlin team is
working to add WASM as a target.

C#: Java for .NET (2000)
C# was designed to provide some of the important abilities of Java on the
.NET (Windows) platform, while freeing designers from the constraint of
following the Java language. The result included numerous improvements
over Java. For example, C# developed the concept of extension functions,
which are heavily used in Kotlin. C# also became significantly more
functional than Java. Many C# features clearly influenced Kotlin design.

Scala: SCALAble (2003)
Martin Odersky created Scala to run on the Java virtual machine: To
piggyback on the work done on the JVM, to interact with Java programs,
and possibly with the idea that it might displace Java. As a researcher,
Odersky and his team used Scala as a platform to experiment with language
features, notably those not included in Java.
These experiments were illuminating and a number of them found their way
into Kotlin, usually in a modified form. For example, the ability to redefine
operators like + for use in special cases is called operator overloading. This
was included in C++ but not Java. Scala added operator overloading but
also allows you to invent new operators by combining any sequence of
characters. This often produces confusing code. A limited form of operator
overloading is included in Kotlin, but you can only overload operators that
already exist.
Scala is also an object-functional hybrid, like Python but with a focus on
pure functions and strict objects. This helped inspire Kotlin’s choice to also
be an object-functional hybrid.
Like Scala, Kotlin runs on the JVM but it interacts with Java far more easily
than Scala does. In addition, Kotlin targets JavaScript, the Android OS, and
it generates native code for other platforms.

Atomic Kotlin evolved from the ideas and material in Atomic Scala.

Groovy: A Dynamic JVM Language (2007)
Dynamic languages are appealing because they are more interactive and
concise than static languages. There have been numerous attempts to
produce a more dynamic programming experience on the JVM, including
Jython (Python) and Clojure (a dialect of Lisp). Groovy was the first to
achieve wide acceptance.
At first glance, Groovy appears to be a cleaned-up version of Java,
producing a more pleasant programming experience. Most Java code will
run unchanged in Groovy, so Java programmers can be quickly productive,
later learning the more sophisticated features that provide notable
programming improvements over Java.
The Kotlin operators ?. and ?: that deal with the problem of emptiness first
appeared in Groovy.
There are numerous Groovy features that are recognizeable in Kotlin. Some
of those features also appear in other languages, which probably pushed
harder for them to be included in Kotlin.

Why Kotlin? (Introduced 2011, Version 1.0: 2016)
Just as C++ was initially intended to be “a better C,” Kotlin was initially
oriented towards being “a better Java.” It has since evolved significantly
beyond that goal.
Kotlin pragmatically chooses only the most successful and helpful features
from other programming languages—after those features have been fieldtested and proven especially valuable.
Thus, if you are coming from another language, you might recognize some
features of that language in Kotlin. This is intentional: Kotlin maximizes
productivity by leveraging tested concepts.

Readability

Readability is a primary goal in the design of the language. Kotlin syntax is
concise—it requires no ceremony for most scenarios, but can still express
complex ideas.

Tooling
Kotlin comes from JetBrains, a company that specializes in developer
tooling. It has first-class tooling support, and many language features were
designed with tooling in mind.

Multi-Paradigm
Kotlin supports multiple programming paradigms, which are gently
introduced in this book:
Imperative programming
Functional programming
Object-oriented programming

Multi-Platform
Kotlin source code can be compiled to different target platforms:
JVM. The source code compiles into JVM bytecode (.class files),
which can then be run on any Java Virtual Machine (JVM).
Android. Android its own runtime called ART (the predecessor was
called Dalvik). The Kotlin source code is compiled into Dalvik
Executable Format (.dex files).
JavaScript, to run inside a web browser.
Native Binaries by generating machine code for specific platforms
and CPUs.
This book focuses on the language itself, using the JVM as the only target
platform. Once you know the language, you can apply Kotlin to different
application and target platforms.

Two Kotlin Features

This atom does not assume you are a programmer, which makes it hard to
explain most of the benefits of Kotlin over the alternatives. There are,
however, two topics which are very impactful and can be explained at this
early juncture: Java interoperability and the issue of indicating “no value.”

Effortless Java Interoperability
To be “a better C,” C++ must be backwards compatible with the syntax of
C, but Kotlin does not have to be backwards compatible with the syntax of
Java—it only needs to work with the JVM. This frees the Kotlin designers
to create a much cleaner and more powerful syntax, without the visual noise
and complication that clutters Java.
For Kotlin to be “a better Java,” the experience of trying it must be pleasant
and frictionless, so Kotlin enables effortless integration with existing Java
projects. You can write a small piece of Kotlin functionality and slip it in
amidst your existing Java code. The Java code doesn’t even know the
Kotlin code is there—it just looks like more Java code.
Companies often investigate a new language by building a standalone
program with that language. Ideally, this program is beneficial but
nonessential, so if the project fails it can be terminated with minimal
damage. Not every company wants to spend the kind of resources necessary
for this type of experimentation. Because Kotlin seamlessly integrates into
an existing Java system (and benefits from that system’s tests), it becomes
very cheap or even free to try Kotlin to see whether it’s a good fit.
In addition, JetBrains, the company that creates Kotlin, provides IntelliJ
IDEA in a “Community” (free) version, which includes support for both
Java and Kotlin along with the ability to easily integrate the two. It even has
a tool that takes Java code and (mostly) rewrites it to Kotlin.
Appendix B covers Java interoperability.

Representing Emptiness
An especially beneficial Kotlin feature is its solution to a challenging
programming problem.

What do you do when someone hands you a dictionary and asks you to look
up a word that doesn’t exist? You could guarantee results by making up
definitions for unknown words. A more useful approach is just to say,
“There’s no definition for that word.” This demonstrates a significant
problem in programming: How do you indicate “no value” for a piece of
storage that is uninitialized, or for the result of an operation?
The null reference was invented in 1965 for ALGOL by Tony Hoare, who
later called it “my billion-dollar mistake.” One problem was that it was too
simple—sometimes being told a room is empty isn’t enough; you might
need to know, for example, why it is empty. This leads to the second
problem: the implementation. For efficiency’s sake, it was typically just a
special value that could fit in a small amount of memory, and what better
than the memory already allocated for that information?
The original C language did not automatically initialize storage, which
caused numerous problems. C++ improved the situation by setting newlyallocated storage to all zeroes. Thus, if a numerical value isn’t initialized, it
is simply a numerical zero. This didn’t seem so bad but it allowed
uninitialized values to quietly slip through the cracks (newer C and C++
compilers often warn you about these). Worse, if a piece of storage was a
pointer—used to indicate (“point to”) another piece of storage—a null
pointer would point at location zero in memory, which is almost certainly
not what you want.
Java prevents accesses to uninitialized values by reporting such errors at
runtime. Although this discovers uninitialized values, it doesn’t solve the
problem because the only way you can verify that your program won’t
crash is by running it. There are swarms of these kinds of bugs in Java code,
and programmers waste huge amounts of time finding them.
Kotlin solves this problem by preventing operations that might cause null
errors at compile time, before the program can run. This is the single-most
celebrated feature by Java programmers adopting Kotlin. This one feature
can minimize or eliminate Java’s null errors.

An Abundance of Benefits

The two features we were able to explain here (without requiring more
programming knowledge) make a huge difference whether or not you’re a
Java programmer. If Kotlin is your first language and you end up on a
project that needs more programmers, it is much easier to recruit one of the
many existing Java programmers into Kotlin.
Kotlin has many other benefits, which we cannot explain until you know
more about programming. That’s what the rest of the book is for.
Languages are often selected by passion, not reason… I’m trying to make
Kotlin a language that is loved for a reason.—Andrey Breslav, Kotlin Lead
Language Designer.

Hello, World!
“Hello, world!” is a program commonly used to demonstrate the basic
syntax of programming languages.
We develop this program in several steps so you understand its parts.
First, let’s examine an empty program that does nothing at all:
// HelloWorld/EmptyProgram.kt
fun main() {
// Program code here ...
}

The example starts with a comment, which is illuminating text that is
ignored by Kotlin. // (two forward slashes) begins a comment that goes to
the end of the current line:
// Single-line comment

Kotlin ignores the // and everything after it until the end of the line. On the
following line, it pays attention again.
The first line of each example in this book is a comment starting with the
name of the the subdirectory containing the source-code file (Here,
HelloWorld) followed by the name of the file: EmptyProgram.kt. The
example subdirectory for each atom corresponds to the name of that atom.
keywords are reserved by the language and given special meaning. The
keyword fun is short for function. A function is a collection of code that can
be executed using that function’s name (we spend a lot of time on functions
throughout the book). The function’s name follows the fun keyword, so in
this case it’s main() (in prose, we follow the function name with
parentheses).

main() is actually a special name for a function; it indicates the “entry

point” for a Kotlin program. A Kotlin program can have many functions
with many different names, but main() is the one that’s automatically called
when you execute the program.
The parameter list follows the function name and is enclosed by
parentheses. Here, we don’t pass anything into main() so the parameter list
is empty.
The function body appears after the parameter list. It begins with an opening
brace ({) and ends with a closing brace (}). The function body contains
statements and expressions. A statement produces an effect, and an
expression yields a result.
EmptyProgram.kt contains no statements or expressions in the body, just a

comment.

Let’s make the program display “Hello, world!” by adding a line in the
main() body:
// HelloWorld/HelloWorld.kt
fun main() {
println("Hello, world!")
}
/* Output:
Hello, world!
*/

The line that displays the greeting begins with println(). Like main(),
println() is a function. This line calls the function, which executes its
body. You give the function name, followed by parentheses containing one
or more parameters. In this book, when referring to a function in the prose,
we add parentheses after the name as a reminder that it is a function. Here,
we say println().
println() takes a single parameter, which is a String. You define a
String by putting characters inside quotes.
println() moves the cursor to a new line after displaying its parameter, so
subsequent output appears on the next line. You can use print() instead,

which leaves the cursor on the same line.
Unlike some languages, you don’t need a semicolon at the end of an
expression in Kotlin. It’s only necessary if you put more than one
expression on a single line (this is discouraged).
For some examples in the book, we show the output at the end of the listing,
inside a multiline comment. A multiline comment starts with a /* (a
forward slash followed by an asterisk) and continues—including line breaks
(which we call newlines)—until a */ (an asterisk followed by a forward
slash) ends the comment:
/* A multiline comment
Doesn't care
about newlines */

It’s possible to add code on the same line after the closing */ of a comment,
but it’s confusing, so people don’t usually do it.
Comments add information that isn’t obvious from reading the code. If
comments only repeat what the code says, they become annoying and
people start ignoring them. When code changes, programmers often forget
to update comments, so it’s good practice to use comments judiciously,
mainly for highlighting tricky aspects of your code.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

var & val
When an identifier holds data, you must decide whether it can be
reassigned.
You create identifiers to refer to elements in your program. The most basic
decision for a data identifier is whether it can change its contents during
program execution, or if it can only be assigned once. This is controlled by
two keywords:
var, short for variable, which means you can reassign its contents.
val, short for value, which means you can only initialize it; you cannot

reassign it.

You define a var like this:
var identifier = initialization

The var keyword is followed by the identifier, an equals sign and then the
initialization value. The identifier begins with a letter or an underscore,
followed by letters, numbers and underscores. Upper and lower case are
distinguished (so thisvalue and thisValue are different).
Here are some var definitions:
// VarAndVal/Vars.kt
fun main() {
var whole = 11
var fractional = 1.4
var words = "Twas Brillig"
println(whole)
println(fractional)
println(words)
}
/* Output:
11
1.4
Twas Brillig
*/

// [1]
// [2]
// [3]

In this book we mark lines with commented numbers in square brackets so
we can refer to them in the text like this:
[1] Create a var named whole and store 11 in it.
[2] Store the “fractional number” 1.4 in the var fractional.
[3] Store some text (a String) in the var words.
Note that println() can take any single value as an argument.
As the name variable implies, a var can vary. That is, you can change the
data stored in a var. We say that a var is mutable:
// VarAndVal/AVarIsMutable.kt
fun main() {
var sum = 1
sum = sum + 2
sum += 3
println(sum)
}
/* Output:
6
*/

The assignment sum = sum + 2 takes the current value of sum, adds two,
and assigns the result back into sum.
The assignment sum += 3 means the same as sum = sum + 3. The +=
operator takes the previous value stored in sum and increases it by 3, then
assigns that new result back to sum.
Changing the value stored in a var is a useful way to express changes.
However, when the complexity of a program increases, your code is clearer,
safer and easier to understand if the values represented by your identifiers
cannot change—that is, they cannot be reassigned. We specify an
unchanging identifier using the val keyword instead of var. A val can only
be assigned once, when it is created:
val identifier = initialization

The val keyword comes from value, indicating something that cannot
change—it is immutable. Choose val instead of var whenever possible. The
Vars.kt example at the beginning of this atom can be rewritten using vals:

// VarAndVal/Vals.kt
fun main() {
val whole = 11
// whole = 15 // Error
// [1]
val fractional = 1.4
val words = "Twas Brillig"
println(whole)
println(fractional)
println(words)
}
/* Output:
11
1.4
Twas Brillig
*/

[1] Once you initialize a val, you can’t reassign it. If we try to reassign
whole to a different number, Kotlin complains, saying “Val cannot be
reassigned.”
Choosing descriptive names for your identifiers makes your code easier to
understand and often reduces the need for comments. In Vals.kt, you have
no idea what whole represents. If your program is storing the number 11 to
represent the time of day when you get coffee, it’s more obvious to others if
you name it coffeetime and easier to read if it’s coffeeTime (following
Kotlin style, we make the first letter lowercase).
vars are useful when data must change as the program is running. This

sounds like a common requirement, but turns out to be avoidable in
practice. In general, your programs are easier to extend and maintain if you
use vals. However, on rare occasions it’s too complex to solve a problem
using only vals. For that reason, Kotlin gives you the flexibility of vars.
However, as you spend more time with vals you’ll discover that you almost
never need vars and that your programs are safer and more reliable without
them.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Data Types
Data can have different types.
To solve a math problem, you write an expression:
5.9 + 6

You know that adding those numbers produces another number. Kotlin
knows that too. You know that one is a fractional number (5.9), which
Kotlin calls a Double, and the other is a whole number (6), which Kotlin
calls an Int. You know the result is a fractional number.
A type (also called data type) tells Kotlin how you intend to use that data. A
type provides a set of values from which an expression may take its values.
A type defines the operations that can be performed on the data, the
meaning of the data, and how values of that type can be stored.
Kotlin uses types to verify that your expressions are correct. In the above
expression, Kotlin creates a new value of type Double to hold the result.
Kotlin tries to adapt to what you need. If you ask it to do something that
violates type rules it produces an error message. For example, try adding a
String and a number:
// DataTypes/StringPlusNumber.kt
fun main() {
println("Sally" + 5.9)
}
/* Output:
Sally5.9
*/

Types tell Kotlin how to use them correctly. In this case, the type rules tell
Kotlin how to add a number to a String: by appending the two values and
creating a String to hold the result.

Now try multiplying a String and a Double by changing the + in
StringPlusNumber.kt to a *:
"Sally" * 5.9

Combining types this way doesn’t make sense to Kotlin, so it gives you an
error.
In var & val, we stored several types. Kotlin figured out the types for us,
based on how we used them. This is called type inference.
We can be more verbose and specify the type:
val identifier: Type = initialization

You start with the val or var keyword, followed by the identifier, a colon,
the type, an =, and the initialization value. So instead of saying:
val n = 1
var p = 1.2

You can say:
val n: Int = 1
var p: Double = 1.2

We’ve told Kotlin that n is an Int and p is a Double, rather than letting it
infer the type.
Here are some of Kotlin’s basic types:
// DataTypes/Types.kt
fun main() {
val whole: Int = 11
// [1]
val fractional: Double = 1.4
// [2]
val trueOrFalse: Boolean = true // [3]
val words: String = "A value"
// [4]
val character: Char = 'z'
// [5]
val lines: String = """Triple quotes let
you have many lines
in your string"""
// [6]
println(whole)
println(fractional)
println(trueOrFalse)
println(words)
println(character)

println(lines)
}
/* Output:
11
1.4
true
A value
z
Triple quotes let
you have many lines
in your string
*/

[1] The Int data type is an integer, which means it only holds whole
numbers.
[2] To hold fractional numbers, use a Double.
[3] A Boolean data type only holds the two special values true and
false.
[4] A String holds a sequence of characters. You assign a value using
a double-quoted String.
[5] A Char holds one character.
[6] If you have many lines and/or special characters, surround them
with triple-double-quotes (this is a triple-quoted String).
Kotlin uses type inference to determine the meaning of mixed types. When
mixing Ints and Doubles during addition, for example, Kotlin decides the
type for the resulting value:
// DataTypes/Inference.kt
fun main() {
val n = 1 + 1.2
println(n)
}
/* Output:
2.2
*/

When you add an Int to a Double using type inference, Kotlin determines
that the result n is a Double and ensures that it follows all the rules for
Doubles.
Kotlin’s type inference is part of its strategy of doing work for the
programmer. If you leave out the type declaration, Kotlin can usually infer
it.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Functions
A function is like a small program that has its own name, and can be
executed (invoked) by calling that name from another function.
A function combines a group of activities, and is the most basic way to
organize your programs and to re-use code.
You pass information into a function, and the function uses that information
to calculate and produce a result. The basic form of a function is:
fun functionName(p1: Type1, p2: Type2, ...): ReturnType {
lines of code
return result
}

p1 and p2 are the parameters: the information you pass into the function.
Each parameter has an identifier name (p1, p2) followed by a colon and the

type of that parameter. The closing parenthesis of the parameter list is
followed by a colon and the type of result produced by the function. The
lines of code in the function body are enclosed in curly braces. The
expression following the return keyword is the result the function
produces when it’s finished.

A parameter is how you define what is passed into a function—it’s the
placeholder. An argument is the actual value that you pass into the function.
The combination of name, parameters and return type is called the function
signature.
Here’s a simple function called multiplyByTwo():
// Functions/MultiplyByTwo.kt
fun multiplyByTwo(x: Int): Int { // [1]
println("Inside multiplyByTwo") // [2]
return x * 2
}

fun main() {
val r = multiplyByTwo(5)
println(r)
}
/* Output:
Inside multiplyByTwo
10
*/

// [3]

[1] Notice the fun keyword, the function name, and the parameter list
consisting of a single parameter. This function takes an Int parameter
and returns an Int.
[2] These two lines are the body of the function. The final line returns
the value of its calculation x * 2 as the result of the function.
[3] This line calls the function with an appropriate argument, and
captures the result into val r. A function call mimics the form of its
declaration: the function name, followed by arguments inside
parentheses.
The function code is executed by calling the function, using the function
name multiplyByTwo() as an abbreviation for that code. This is why
functions are the most basic form of simplification and code reuse in
programming. You can also think of a function as an expression with
substitutable values (the parameters).
println() is also a function call—it just happens to be provided by Kotlin.

We refer to functions defined by Kotlin as library functions.

If the function doesn’t provide a meaningful result, its return type is Unit.
You can specify Unit explicitly if you want, but Kotlin lets you omit it:
// Functions/SayHello.kt
fun sayHello() {
println("Hallo!")
}
fun sayGoodbye(): Unit {
println("Auf Wiedersehen!")
}
fun main() {
sayHello()
sayGoodbye()
}
/* Output:

Hallo!
Auf Wiedersehen!
*/

Both sayHello() and sayGoodbye() return Unit, but sayHello() leaves
out the explicit declaration. The main() function also returns Unit.
If a function is only a single expression, you can use the abbreviated syntax
of an equals sign followed by the expression:
fun functionName(arg1: Type1, arg2: Type2, ...): ReturnType = expression

A function body surrounded by curly braces is called a block body. A
function body using the equals syntax is called an expression body.
Here, multiplyByThree() uses an expression body:
// Functions/MultiplyByThree.kt
fun multiplyByThree(x: Int): Int = x * 3
fun main() {
println(multiplyByThree(5))
}
/* Output:
15
*/

This is a short version of saying return x * 3 inside a block body.
Kotlin infers the return type of a function that has an expression body:
// Functions/MultiplyByFour.kt
fun multiplyByFour(x: Int) = x * 4
fun main() {
val result: Int = multiplyByFour(5)
println(result)
}
/* Output:
20
*/

Kotlin infers that multiplyByFour() returns an Int.
Kotlin can only infer return types for expression bodies. If a function has a
block body and you omit its type, that function returns Unit.

When writing functions, choose descriptive names. This makes the code
easier to read, and can often reduce the need for code comments. We can’t
always be as descriptive as we would prefer with the function names in this
book because we’re constrained by line widths.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

if Expressions
An if expression makes a choice.
The if keyword tests an expression to see whether it’s true or false and
performs an action based on the result. A true-or-false expression is called a
Boolean, after the mathematician George Boole who invented the logic
behind these expressions. Here’s an example using the > (greater than) and
< (less than) symbols:
// IfExpressions/If1.kt
fun main() {
if (1 > 0)
println("It's true!")
if (10 < 11) {
println("10 < 11")
println("ten is less than eleven")
}
}
/* Output:
It's true!
10 < 11
ten is less than eleven
*/

The expression inside the parentheses after the if must evaluate to true or
false. If true, the following expression is executed. To execute multiple
lines, place them within curly braces.
We can create a Boolean expression in one place, and use it in another:
// IfExpressions/If2.kt
fun main() {
val x: Boolean = 1 >= 1
if (x)
println("It's true!")
}
/* Output:
It's true!
*/

Because x is Boolean, the if can test it directly by saying if(x).

The Boolean >= operator returns true if the expression on the left side of
the operator is greater than or equal to that on the right. Likewise, <=
returns true if the expression on the left side is less than or equal to that on
the right.
The else keyword allows you to handle both true and false paths:
// IfExpressions/If3.kt
fun main() {
val n: Int = -11
if (n > 0)
println("It's positive")
else
println("It's negative or zero")
}
/* Output:
It's negative or zero
*/

The else keyword is only used in conjunction with if. You are not limited
to a single check—you can test multiple combinations by combining else
and if:
// IfExpressions/If4.kt
fun main() {
val n: Int = -11
if (n > 0)
println("It's positive")
else if (n == 0)
println("It's zero")
else
println("It's negative")
}
/* Output:
It's negative
*/

Here we use == to check two numbers for equality. != tests for inequality.
The typical pattern is to start with if, followed by as many else if clauses
as you need, ending with a final else for anything that doesn’t match all the
previous tests. When an if expression reaches a certain size and complexity
you’ll probably use a when expression instead. when is described later in the
book, in when Expressions.
The “not” operator ! tests for the opposite of a Boolean expression:

// IfExpressions/If5.kt
fun main() {
val y: Boolean = false
if (!y)
println("!y is true")
}
/* Output:
!y is true
*/

To verbalize if(!y), say “if not y.”
The entire if is an expression, so it can produce a result:
// IfExpressions/If6.kt
fun main() {
val num = 10
val result = if (num > 100) 4 else 42
println(result)
}
/* Output:
42
*/

Here, we store the value produced by the entire if expression in an
intermediate identifier called result. If the condition is satisfied, the first
branch produces result. If not, the else value becomes result.
Let’s practice creating functions. Here’s one that takes a Boolean parameter:
// IfExpressions/TrueOrFalse.kt
fun trueOrFalse(exp: Boolean): String {
if (exp)
return "It's true!"
// [1]
return "It's false"
// [2]
}
fun main() {
val b = 1
println(trueOrFalse(b < 3))
println(trueOrFalse(b >= 3))
}
/* Output:
It's true!
It's false
*/

The Boolean parameter exp is passed to the function trueOrFalse(). If the
argument is passed as an expression, such as b < 3, that expression is first

evaluated and the result is passed to the function. trueOrFalse() tests exp
and if the result is true, line [1] is executed, otherwise line [2] is executed.
[1] return says, “Leave the function and produce this value as the
function’s result.” Notice that return can appear anywhere in a
function and does not have to be at the end.
Rather than using return as in the previous example, you can use the else
keyword to produce the result as an expression:
// IfExpressions/OneOrTheOther.kt
fun oneOrTheOther(exp: Boolean): String =
if (exp)
"True!" // No 'return' necessary
else
"False"
fun main() {
val x = 1
println(oneOrTheOther(x == 1))
println(oneOrTheOther(x == 2))
}
/* Output:
True!
False
*/

Instead of two expressions in trueOrFalse(), oneOrTheOther() is a single
expression. The result of that expression is the result of the function, so the
if expression becomes the function body.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

String Templates
A String template is a programmatic way to generate a String.
If you put a $ before an identifier name, the String template will insert that
identifier’s contents into the String:
// StringTemplates/StringTemplates.kt
fun main() {
val answer = 42
println("Found $answer!")
println("printing a $1")
}
/* Output:
Found 42!
printing a $1
*/

// [1]
// [2]

[1] $answer substitutes the value of answer.
[2] If what follows the $ isn’t recognizable as a program identifier,
nothing special happens.
You can also insert values into a String using concatenation (+):
// StringTemplates/StringConcatenation.kt
fun main() {
val s = "hi\n" // \n is a newline character
val n = 11
val d = 3.14
println("first: " + s + "second: " +
n + ", third: " + d)
}
/* Output:
first: hi
second: 11, third: 3.14
*/

Placing an expression inside ${} evaluates it. The return value is converted
to a String and inserted into the resulting String:
// StringTemplates/ExpressionInTemplate.kt

fun main() {
val condition = true
println(
"${if (condition) 'a' else 'b'}")
val x = 11
println("$x + 4 = ${x + 4}")
}
/* Output:
a
11 + 4 = 15
*/

// [1]

[1] if(condition) 'a' else 'b' is evaluated and the result is
substituted for the entire ${} expression.
When a String must include a special character, such as a quote, you can
either escape that character with a \ (backslash), or use a String literal in
triple quotes:
// StringTemplates/TripleQuotes.kt
fun main() {
val s = "value"
println("s = \"$s\".")
println("""s = "$s".""")
}
/* Output:
s = "value".
s = "value".
*/

With triple quotes, you insert a value of an expression the same way you do
it for a single-quoted String.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Number Types
Different types of numbers are stored in different ways.
If you create an identifier and assign an integer value to it, Kotlin infers the
Int type:
// NumberTypes/InferInt.kt
fun main() {
val million = 1_000_000
println(million)
}
/* Output:
1000000
*/

// Infers Int

For readability, Kotlin allows underscores within numerical values.
The basic mathematical operators for numbers are the ones available in
most programming languages: addition (+), subtraction (-), division (/),
multiplication (*) and modulus (%), which produces the remainder from
integer division:
// NumberTypes/Modulus.kt
fun main() {
val numerator: Int = 19
val denominator: Int = 10
println(numerator % denominator)
}
/* Output:
9
*/

Integer division truncates its result:
// NumberTypes/IntDivisionTruncates.kt
fun main() {
val numerator: Int = 19
val denominator: Int = 10
println(numerator / denominator)
}

/* Output:
1
*/

If the operation had rounded the result, the output would be 2.
The order of operations follows basic arithmetic:
// NumberTypes/OpOrder.kt
fun main() {
println(45 + 5 * 6)
}
/* Output:
75
*/

The multiplication operation 5 * 6 is performed first, followed by the
addition 45 + 30.
If you want 45 + 5 to happen first, use parentheses:
// NumberTypes/OpOrderParens.kt
fun main() {
println((45 + 5) * 6)
}
/* Output:
300
*/

Now let’s calculate body mass index (BMI), which is weight in kilograms
divided by the square of the height in meters. If you have a BMI of less than
18.5, you are underweight. Between 18.5 and 24.9 is normal weight. BMI
of 25 and higher is overweight. This example also shows the preferred
formatting style when you can’t fit the function’s parameters on a single
line:
// NumberTypes/BMIMetric.kt
fun bmiMetric(
weight: Double,
height: Double
): String {
val bmi = weight / (height * height)
return if (bmi < 18.5) "Underweight"
else if (bmi < 25) "Normal weight"
else "Overweight"
}

// [1]

fun main() {
val weight = 72.57 // 160 lbs
val height = 1.727 // 68 inches
val status = bmiMetric(weight, height)
println(status)
}
/* Output:
Normal weight
*/

[1] If you remove the parentheses, you divide weight by height then
multiply that result by height. That’s a much larger number, and the
wrong answer.
bmiMetric() uses Doubles for the weight and height. A Double holds very

large and very small floating-point numbers.

Here’s a version using English units, represented by Int parameters:
// NumberTypes/BMIEnglish.kt
fun bmiEnglish(
weight: Int,
height: Int
): String {
val bmi =
weight / (height * height) * 703.07 // [1]
return if (bmi < 18.5) "Underweight"
else if (bmi < 25) "Normal weight"
else "Overweight"
}
fun main() {
val weight = 160
val height = 68
val status = bmiEnglish(weight, height)
println(status)
}
/* Output:
Underweight
*/

Why does the result differ from bmiMetric(), which uses Doubles? When
you divide an integer by another integer, Kotlin produces an integer result.
The standard way to deal with the remainder during integer division is
truncation, meaning “chop it off and throw it away” (there’s no rounding).
So if you divide 5 by 2 you get 2, and 7/10 is zero. When Kotlin calculates
bmi in expression [1], it divides 160 by 68 * 68 and gets zero. It then
multiplies zero by 703.07 to get zero.

To avoid this problem, move 703.07 to the front of the calculation. The
calculations are then forced to be Double:
val bmi = 703.07 * weight / (height * height)

The Double parameters in bmiMetric() prevent this problem. Convert
computations to the desired type as early as possible to preserve accuracy.
All programming languages have limits to what they can store within an
integer. Kotlin’s Int type can take values between -231 and +231-1, a
constraint of the Int 32-bit representation. If you sum or multiply two Ints
that are big enough, you’ll overflow the result:
// NumberTypes/IntegerOverflow.kt
fun main() {
val i: Int = Int.MAX_VALUE
println(i + i)
}
/* Output:
-2
*/

Int.MAX_VALUE is a predefined value which is the largest number an Int

can hold.

The overflow produces a result that is clearly incorrect, as it is both
negative and much smaller than we expect. Kotlin issues a warning
whenever it detects a potential overflow.
Preventing overflow is your responsibility as a developer. Kotlin can’t
always detect overflow during compilation, and it doesn’t prevent overflow
because that would produce an unacceptable performance impact.
If your program contains large numbers, you can use Longs, which
accommodate values from -263 to +263-1. To define a val of type Long, you
can specify the type explicitly or put L at the end of a numeric literal, which
tells Kotlin to treat that value as a Long:
// NumberTypes/LongConstants.kt
fun main() {
val i = 0
val l1 = 0L

// Infers Int
// L creates Long

val l2: Long = 0
// Explicit type
println("$l1 $l2")

}
/* Output:
0 0
*/

By changing to Longs we prevent the overflow in IntegerOverflow.kt:
// NumberTypes/UsingLongs.kt
fun main() {
val i = Int.MAX_VALUE
println(0L + i + i)
println(1_000_000 * 1_000_000L)
}
/* Output:
4294967294
1000000000000
*/

// [1]
// [2]

Using a numeric literal in both [1] and [2] forces Long calculations, and also
produces a result of type Long. The location where the L appears is
unimportant. If one of the values is Long, the resulting expression is Long.
Although they can hold much larger values than Ints, Longs still have size
limitations:
// NumberTypes/BiggestLong.kt
fun main() {
println(Long.MAX_VALUE)
}
/* Output:
9223372036854775807
*/

Long.MAX_VALUE is the largest value a Long can hold.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Booleans
if Expressions demonstrated the “not” operator !, which negates a
Boolean value. This atom introduces more Boolean Algebra.

We start with the operators “and” and “or”:
&& (and): Produces true only if the Boolean expression on the left of
the operator and the one on the right are both true.
|| (or): Produces true if either the expression on the left or right of
the operator is true, or if both are true.

In this example, we determine whether a business is open or closed, based
on the hour:
// Booleans/Open1.kt
fun isOpen1(hour: Int) {
val open = 9
val closed = 20
println("Operating hours: $open - $closed")
val status =
if (hour >= open && hour <= closed) // [1]
true
else
false
println("Open: $status")
}
fun main() = isOpen1(6)
/* Output:
Operating hours: 9 - 20
Open: false
*/

main() is a single function call, so we can use an expression body as

described in Functions.

The if expression in [1] Checks whether hour is between the opening time
and closing time, so we combine the expressions with the Boolean && (and).

The if expression can be simplified. The result of the expression if(cond)
true else false is just cond:
// Booleans/Open2.kt
fun isOpen2(hour: Int) {
val open = 9
val closed = 20
println("Operating hours: $open - $closed")
val status = hour >= open && hour <= closed
println("Open: $status")
}
fun main() = isOpen2(6)
/* Output:
Operating hours: 9 - 20
Open: false
*/

Let’s reverse the logic and check whether the business is currently closed.
The “or” operator || produces true if at least one of the conditions is
satisfied:
// Booleans/Closed.kt
fun isClosed(hour: Int) {
val open = 9
val closed = 20
println("Operating hours: $open - $closed")
val status = hour < open || hour > closed
println("Closed: $status")
}
fun main() = isClosed(6)
/* Output:
Operating hours: 9 - 20
Closed: true
*/

Boolean operators enable complicated logic in compact expressions.

However, things can easily become confusing. Strive for readability and
specify your intentions explicitly.
Here’s an example of a complicated Boolean expression where different
evaluation order produces different results:
// Booleans/EvaluationOrder.kt
fun main() {
val sunny = true
val hoursSleep = 6
val exercise = false

val temp = 55
// [1]:
val happy1 = sunny && temp > 50 ||
exercise && hoursSleep > 7
println(happy1)
// [2]:
val sameHappy1 = (sunny && temp > 50) ||
(exercise && hoursSleep > 7)
println(sameHappy1)
// [3]:
val notSame =
(sunny && temp > 50 || exercise) &&
hoursSleep > 7
println(notSame)

}
/* Output:
true
true
false
*/

The Boolean expressions are sunny, temp > 50, exercise, and hoursSleep
> 7. We read happy1 as “It’s sunny and the temperature is greater than 50
or I’ve exercised and had more than 7 hours of sleep.” But does && have
precedence over ||, or the opposite?
The expression in [1] uses Kotlin’s default evaluation order. This produces
the same result as the expression in [2] because, without parentheses, the
“ands” are evaluated first, then the “or”. The expression in [3] uses
parentheses to produce a different result. In [3], we’re only happy if we get
at least 7 hours of sleep.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Repetition with while
Computers are ideal for repetitive tasks.
The most basic form of repetition uses the while keyword. This repeats a
block as long as the controlling Boolean expression is true:
while (Boolean-expression) {
// Code to be repeated
}

The Boolean expression is evaluated once at the beginning of the loop and
again before each further iteration through the block.
// RepetitionWithWhile/WhileLoop.kt
fun condition(i: Int) = i < 100
fun main() {
var i = 0
while (condition(i)) {
print(".")
i += 10
}
}
/* Output:
..........
*/

// [1]

// [2]
// [3]

[1] The comparison operator < produces a Boolean result, so Kotlin
infers Boolean as the result type for condition().
[2] The conditional expression for the while says: “repeat the
statements in the body as long as condition() returns true.”
[3] The += operator adds 10 to i and assigns the result to i in a single
operation (i must be a var for this to work). This is equivalent to:
i = i + 10

There’s a second way to use while, in conjunction with the do keyword:
do {
// Code to be repeated

} while (Boolean-expression)

Rewriting WhileLoop.kt to use a do-while produces:
// RepetitionWithWhile/DoWhileLoop.kt
fun main() {
var i = 0
do {
print(".")
i += 10
} while (condition(i))
}
/* Output:
..........
*/

The sole difference between while and do-while is that the body of the dowhile always executes at least once, even if the Boolean expression initially
produces false. In a while, if the conditional is false the first time, then
the body never executes. In practice, do-while is less common than while.
The short versions of assignment operators are available for all the
arithmetic operations: +=, -=, *=, /=, and %=. This uses -= and %=:
// RepetitionWithWhile/AssignmentOperators.kt
fun main() {
var n = 10
val d = 3
print(n)
while (n > d) {
n -= d
print(" - $d")
}
println(" = $n")
var m = 10
print(m)
m %= d
println(" % $d = $m")

}
/* Output:
10 - 3 - 3 - 3 = 1
10 % 3 = 1
*/

To calculate the remainder of the integer division of two natural numbers,
we start with a while loop, then use the remainder operator.

Adding 1 and subtracting 1 from a number are so common that they have
their own increment and decrement operators: ++ and --. You can replace i
+= 1 with i++:
// RepetitionWithWhile/IncrementOperator.kt
fun main() {
var i = 0
while (i < 4) {
print(".")
i++
}
}
/* Output:
....
*/

In practice, while loops are not used for iterating over a range of numbers.
The for loop is used instead. This is covered in the next atom.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Looping & Ranges
The for keyword executes a block of code for each value in a
sequence.
The set of values can be a range of integers, a String, or, as you’ll see later
in the book, a collection of items. The in keyword indicates that you are
stepping through values:
for (v in values) {
// Do something with v
}

Each time through the loop, v is given the next element in values.
Here’s a for loop repeating an action a fixed number of times:
// LoopingAndRanges/RepeatThreeTimes.kt
fun main() {
for (i in 1..3) {
println("Hey $i!")
}
}
/* Output:
Hey 1!
Hey 2!
Hey 3!
*/

The output shows the index i receiving each value in the range from 1 to 3.
A range is an interval of values defined by a pair of endpoints. There are
two basic ways to define ranges:
// LoopingAndRanges/DefiningRanges.kt
fun main() {
val range1 = 1..10
val range2 = 0 until 10
println(range1)
println(range2)
}

// [1]
// [2]

/* Output:
1..10
0..9
*/

[1] Using .. syntax includes both bounds in the resulting range.
[2] until excludes the end. The output shows that 10 is not part of the
range.
Displaying a range produces a readable format.
This sums the numbers from 10 to 100:
// LoopingAndRanges/SumUsingRange.kt
fun main() {
var sum = 0
for (n in 10..100) {
sum += n
}
println("sum = $sum")
}
/* Output:
sum = 5005
*/

You can iterate over a range in reverse order. You can also use a step value
to change the interval from the default of 1:
// LoopingAndRanges/ForWithRanges.kt
fun showRange(r: IntProgression) {
for (i in r) {
print("$i ")
}
print("
// $r")
println()
}
fun main() {
showRange(1..5)
showRange(0 until 5)
showRange(5 downTo 1)
// [1]
showRange(0..9 step 2)
// [2]
showRange(0 until 10 step 3)
// [3]
showRange(9 downTo 2 step 3)
}
/* Output:
1 2 3 4 5
// 1..5
0 1 2 3 4
// 0..4
5 4 3 2 1
// 5 downTo 1 step 1
0 2 4 6 8
// 0..8 step 2
0 3 6 9
// 0..9 step 3

9 6 3
*/

// 9 downTo 3 step 3

[1] downTo produces a decreasing range.
[2] step changes the interval. Here, the range steps by a value of two
instead of one.
[3] until can also be used with step. Notice how this affects the
output.
In each case the sequence of numbers form an arithmetic progression.
showRange() accepts an IntProgression parameter, which is a built-in
type that includes Int ranges. Notice that the String representation of each
IntProgression as it appears in output comment for each line is often
different from the range passed into showRange()—the IntProgression is
translating the input into an equivalent common form.
You can also produce a range of characters. This for iterates from a to z:
// LoopingAndRanges/ForWithCharRange.kt
fun main() {
for (c in 'a'..'z') {
print(c)
}
}
/* Output:
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz
*/

You can iterate over a range of elements that are whole quantities, like
integers and characters, but not floating-point values.
Square brackets access characters by index. Because we start counting
characters in a String at zero, s[0] selects the first character of the String
s. Selecting s.lastIndex produces the final index number:
// LoopingAndRanges/IndexIntoString.kt
fun main() {
val s = "abc"
for (i in 0..s.lastIndex) {
print(s[i] + 1)
}
}
/* Output:
bcd
*/

Sometimes people describe s[0] as “the zeroth character.”
Characters are stored as numbers corresponding to their ASCII codes, so
adding an integer to a character produces a new character corresponding to
the new code value:
// LoopingAndRanges/AddingIntToChar.kt
fun main() {
val ch: Char = 'a'
println(ch + 25)
println(ch < 'z')
}
/* Output:
z
true
*/

The second println() shows that you can compare character codes.
A for loop can iterate over Strings directly:
// LoopingAndRanges/IterateOverString.kt
fun main() {
for (ch in "Jnskhm ") {
print(ch + 1)
}
}
/* Output:
Kotlin!
*/

ch receives each character in turn.

In the following example, the function hasChar() iterates over the String s
and tests whether it contains a given character ch. The return in the middle
of the function stops the function when the answer is found:
// LoopingAndRanges/HasChar.kt
fun hasChar(s: String, ch: Char): Boolean {
for (c in s) {
if (c == ch) return true
}
return false
}
fun main() {
println(hasChar("kotlin", 't'))
println(hasChar("kotlin", 'a'))

}
/* Output:
true
false
*/

The next atom shows that hasChar() is unnecessary—you can use built-in
syntax instead.
If you simply want to repeat an action a fixed number of times, you may
use repeat() instead of a for loop:
// LoopingAndRanges/RepeatHi.kt
fun main() {
repeat(2) {
println("hi!")
}
}
/* Output:
hi!
hi!
*/

repeat() is a standard library function, not a keyword. You’ll see how it

was created much later in the book.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

The in Keyword
The in keyword tests whether a value is within a range.
// InKeyword/MembershipInRange.kt
fun main() {
val percent = 35
println(percent in 1..100)
}
/* Output:
true
*/

In Booleans, you learned to check bounds explicitly:
// InKeyword/MembershipUsingBounds.kt
fun main() {
val percent = 35
println(0 <= percent && percent <= 100)
}
/* Output:
true
*/

0 <= x && x <= 100 is logically equivalent to x in 0..100. IntelliJ IDEA

suggests automatically replacing the first form with the second, which is
easier to read and understand.

The in keyword is used for both iteration and membership. An in inside the
control expression of a for loop means iteration, otherwise in checks
membership:
// InKeyword/IterationVsMembership.kt
fun main() {
val values = 1..3
for (v in values) {
println("iteration $v")
}
val v = 2
if (v in values)
println("$v is a member of $values")
}

/* Output:
iteration 1
iteration 2
iteration 3
2 is a member of 1..3
*/

The in keyword is not limited to ranges. You can also check whether a
character is a part of a String. The following example uses in instead of
hasChar() from the previous atom:
// InKeyword/InString.kt
fun main() {
println('t' in "kotlin")
println('a' in "kotlin")
}
/* Output:
true
false
*/

Later in the book you’ll see that in works with other types, as well.
Here, in tests whether a character belongs to a range of characters:
// InKeyword/CharRange.kt
fun isDigit(ch: Char) = ch in '0'..'9'
fun notDigit(ch: Char) =
ch !in '0'..'9'

// [1]

fun main() {
println(isDigit('a'))
println(isDigit('5'))
println(notDigit('z'))
}
/* Output:
false
true
true
*/

[1] !in checks that a value doesn’t belong to a range.
You can create a Double range, but you can only use it to check for
membership:
// InKeyword/FloatingPointRange.kt
fun inFloatRange(n: Double) {

}

val r = 1.0..10.0
println("$n in $r? ${n in r}")

fun main() {
inFloatRange(0.999999)
inFloatRange(5.0)
inFloatRange(10.0)
inFloatRange(10.0000001)
}
/* Output:
0.999999 in 1.0..10.0? false
5.0 in 1.0..10.0? true
10.0 in 1.0..10.0? true
10.0000001 in 1.0..10.0? false
*/

Floating-point ranges can only be created using .. because until would
mean excluding a floating-point number as an endpoint, which doesn’t
make sense.
You can check whether a String is a member of a range of Strings:
// InKeyword/StringRange.kt
fun main() {
println("ab" in "aa".."az")
println("ba" in "aa".."az")
}
/* Output:
true
false
*/

Here Kotlin uses alphabetic comparison.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Expressions & Statements
Statements and expressions are the smallest useful fragments of code
in most programming languages.
There’s a basic difference: a statement has an effect, but produces no result.
An expression always produces a result.
Because it doesn’t produce a result, a statement must change the state of its
surroundings to be useful. Another way to say this is “a statement is called
for its side effects” (that is, what it does other than producing a result). As a
memory aid:
A statement changes state.
One definition of “express” is “to force or squeeze out,” as in “to express
the juice from an orange.” So
An expression expresses.
That is, it produces a result.
The for loop is a statement in Kotlin. You cannot assign it because there’s
no result:
// ExpressionsStatements/ForIsAStatement.kt
fun main() {
// Can't do this:
// val f = for(i in 1..10) {}
// Compiler error message:
// for is not an expression, and
// only expressions are allowed here
}

A for loop is used for its side effects.

An expression produces a value, which can be assigned or used as part of
another expression, whereas a statement is always a top-level element.
Every function call is an expression. Even if the function returns Unit and
is called only for its side effects, the result can still be assigned:
// ExpressionsStatements/UnitReturnType.kt
fun unitFun() = Unit
fun main() {
println(unitFun())
val u1: Unit = println(42)
println(u1)
val u2 = println(0) // Type inference
println(u2)
}
/* Output:
kotlin.Unit
42
kotlin.Unit
0
kotlin.Unit
*/

The Unit type contains a single value called Unit, which you can return
directly, as seen in unitFun(). Calling println() also returns Unit. The
val u1 captures the return value of println() and is explicitly declared as
Unit while u2 uses type inference.
if creates an expression, so you can assign its result:
// ExpressionsStatements/AssigningAnIf.kt
fun main() {
val result1 = if (11 > 42) 9 else 5
val result2 = if (1 < 2) {
val a = 11
a + 42
} else 42
val result3 =
if ('x' < 'y')
println("x < y")
else
println("x > y")
println(result1)
println(result2)
println(result3)

}
/* Output:

x < y
5
53
kotlin.Unit
*/

The first output line is x < y, even though result3 isn’t displayed until the
end of main(). This happens because evaluating result3 calls println(),
and the evaluation occurs when result3 is defined.
Notice that a is defined inside the block of code for result2. The result of
the last expression becomes the result of the if expression; here, it’s the
sum of 11 and 42. But what about a? Once you leave the code block (move
outside the curly braces), you can’t access a. It is temporary and is
discarded once you exit the scope of that block.
The increment operator i++ is also an expression, even if it looks like a
statement. Kotlin follows the approach used by C-like languages and
provides two versions of increment and decrement operators with slightly
different semantics. The prefix operator appears before the operand, as in
++i, and returns the value after the increment happens. You can read it as
“first do the increment, then return the resulting value.” The postfix
operator is placed after the operand, as in i++, and returns the value of i
before the increment occurs. You can read it as “first produce the result,
then do the increment.”
// ExpressionsStatements/PostfixVsPrefix.kt
fun main() {
var i = 10
println(i++)
println(i)
var j = 20
println(++j)
println(j)
}
/* Output:
10
11
21
21
*/

The decrement operator also has two versions: --i and i--. Using
increment and decrement operators within other expressions is discouraged
because it can produce confusing code:

// ExpressionsStatements/Confusing.kt
fun main() {
var i = 1
println(i++ + ++i)
}

Try to guess what the output will be, then check it.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Summary 1
This atom summarizes and reviews the atoms in Section I, starting at
Hello, World! and ending with Expressions & Statements.
If you’re an experienced programmer, this should be your first atom. New
programmers should read this atom and perform the exercises as a review
of Section I.
If anything isn’t clear to you, study the associated atom for that topic (the
sub-headings correspond to atom titles).

Hello, World!
Kotlin supports both // single-line comments, and /*-to-*/ multiline
comments. A program’s entry point is the function main():
// Summary1/Hello.kt
fun main() {
println("Hello, world!")
}
/* Output:
Hello, world!
*/

The first line of each example in this book is a comment containing the
name of the atom’s subdirectory, followed by a / and the name of the file.
You can find all the extracted code examples via AtomicKotlin.com.
println() is a standard library function which takes a single String
parameter (or a parameter that can be converted to a String). println()
moves the cursor to a new line after displaying its parameter, while print()

leaves the cursor on the same line.

Kotlin does not require a semicolon at the end of an expression or
statement. Semicolons are only necessary to separate multiple expressions

or statements on a single line.
var & val, Data Types

To create an unchanging identifier, use the val keyword followed by the
identifier name, a colon, and the type for that value. Then add an equals
sign and the value to assign to that val:
val identifier: Type = initialization

Once a val is assigned, it cannot be reassigned.
Kotlin’s type inference can usually determine the type automatically, based
on the initialization value. This produces a simpler definition:
val identifier = initialization

Both of the following are valid:
val daysInFebruary = 28
val daysInMarch: Int = 31

A var (variable) definition looks the same, using var instead of val:
var identifier1 = initialization
var identifier2: Type = initialization

Unlike a val, you can modify a var, so the following is legal:
var hoursSpent = 20
hoursSpent = 25

However, the type can’t be changed, so you get an error if you say:
hoursSpent = 30.5

Kotlin infers the Int type when hoursSpent is defined, so it won’t accept
the change to a floating-point value.

Functions
Functions are named subroutines:

fun functionName(arg1: Type1, arg2: Type2, ...): ReturnType {
// Lines of code ...
return result
}

The fun keyword is followed by the function name and the parameter list in
parentheses. Each parameter must have an explicit type because Kotlin
cannot infer parameter types. The function itself has a type, defined in the
same way as for a var or val (a colon followed by the type). A function’s
type is the type of the returned result.
The function signature is followed by the function body contained within
curly braces. The return statement provides the function’s return value.
You can use an abbreviated syntax when the function consists of a single
expression:
fun functionName(arg1: Type1, arg2: Type2, ...): ReturnType = result

This form is called an expression body. Instead of an opening curly brace,
use an equals sign followed by the expression. You can omit the return type
because Kotlin infers it.
Here’s a function that produces the cube of its parameter, and another that
adds an exclamation point to a String:
// Summary1/BasicFunctions.kt
fun cube(x: Int): Int {
return x * x * x
}
fun bang(s: String) = s + "!"
fun main() {
println(cube(3))
println(bang("pop"))
}
/* Output:
27
pop!
*/

cube() has a block body with an explicit return statement. bang() is an

expression body producing the function’s return value. Kotlin infers
bang()’s return type to be String.

Booleans
For Boolean algebra, Kotlin provides operators such as:
! (not) logically negates the value (turns true to false and vice-

versa).
&& (and) returns true only if both conditions are true.
|| (or) returns true if at least one of the conditions is true.
// Summary1/Booleans.kt
fun main() {
val opens = 9
val closes = 20
println("Operating hours: $opens - $closes")
val hour = 6
println("Current time: " + hour)
val isOpen = hour >= opens && hour <= closes
println("Open: " + isOpen)
println("Not open: " + !isOpen)
val isClosed = hour < opens || hour > closes
println("Closed: " + isClosed)

}
/* Output:
Operating hours: 9 - 20
Current time: 6
Open: false
Not open: true
Closed: true
*/

isOpen’s initializer uses && to test whether both conditions are true. The
first condition hour >= opens is false, so the result of the entire
expression becomes false. The initializer for isClosed uses ||, producing
true if at least one of the conditions is true. The expression hour < opens
is true, so the whole expression is true.

if Expressions

Because if is an expression, it produces a result. This result can be assigned
to a var or val. Here, you also see the use of the else keyword:
// Summary1/IfResult.kt
fun main() {
val result = if (99 < 100) 4 else 42
println(result)
}

/* Output:
4
*/

Either branch of an if expression can be a multiline block of code
surrounded by curly braces:
// Summary1/IfExpression.kt
fun main() {
val activity = "swimming"
val hour = 10
val isOpen = if (
activity == "swimming" ||
activity == "ice skating") {
val opens = 9
val closes = 20
println("Operating hours: " +
opens + " - " + closes)
hour >= opens && hour <= closes
} else {
false
}
println(isOpen)

}
/* Output:
Operating hours: 9 - 20
true
*/

A value defined inside a block of code, such as opens, is not accessible
outside the scope of that block. Because they are defined globally to the if
expression, activity and hour are accessible inside the if expression.
The result of an if expression is the result of the last expression of the
chosen branch. Here, it’s hour >= opens && hour <= closes which is
true.

String Templates
You can insert a value within a String using String templates. Use a $
before the identifier name:
// Summary1/StrTemplates.kt
fun main() {
val answer = 42
println("Found $answer!")
val condition = true
println(

// [1]

"${if (condition) 'a' else 'b'}")
println("printing a $1")

}
/* Output:
Found 42!
a
printing a $1
*/

// [2]
// [3]

[1] $answer substitutes the value contained in answer.
[2] ${if(condition) 'a' else 'b'} evaluates and substitutes the
result of the expression inside ${}.
[3] If the $ is followed by anything unrecognizable as a program
identifier, nothing special happens.
Use triple-quoted Strings to store multiline text or text with special
characters:
// Summary1/ThreeQuotes.kt
fun json(q: String, a: Int) = """{
"question" : "$q",
"answer" : $a
}"""
fun main() {
println(json("The Ultimate", 42))
}
/* Output:
{
"question" : "The Ultimate",
"answer" : 42
}
*/

You don’t need to escape special characters like " within a triple-quoted
String. (In a regular String you write \" to insert a double quote). As with
normal Strings, you can insert an identifier or an expression using $ inside
a triple-quoted String.

Number Types
Kotlin provides integer types (Int, Long) and floating point types (Double).
A whole number constant is Int by default and Long if you append an L. A
constant is Double if it contains a decimal point:
// Summary1/NumberTypes.kt

fun main() {
val n = 1000
// Int
val l = 1000L
// Long
val d = 1000.0 // Double
println("$n $l $d")
}
/* Output:
1000 1000 1000.0
*/

An Int holds values between -231 and +231-1. Integral values can overflow;
for example, adding anything to Int.MAX_VALUE produces an overflow:
// Summary1/Overflow.kt
fun main() {
println(Int.MAX_VALUE + 1)
println(Int.MAX_VALUE + 1L)
}
/* Output:
-2147483648
2147483648
*/

In the second println() statement we append L to 1, forcing the whole
expression to be of type Long, which avoids the overflow. (A Long can hold
values between -263 and +263-1).
When you divide an Int with another Int, Kotlin produces an Int result,
and any remainder is truncated. So 1/2 produces 0. If a Double is involved,
the Int is promoted to Double before the operation, so 1.0/2 produces 0.5.
You might expect d1 in the following to produce 3.4:
// Summary1/Truncation.kt
fun main() {
val d1: Double = 3.0 + 2 / 5
println(d1)
val d2: Double = 3 + 2.0 / 5
println(d2)
}
/* Output:
3.0
3.4
*/

Because of evaluation order, it doesn’t. Kotlin first divides 2 by 5, and
integer math produces 0, yielding an answer of 3.0. The same evaluation
order does produce the expected result for d2. Dividing 2.0 by 5 produces

0.4. The 3 is promoted to a Double because we add it to a Double (0.4),
which produces 3.4.

Understanding evaluation order helps you to decipher what a program does,
both with logical operations (Boolean expressions) and with mathematical
operations. If you’re unsure about evaluation order, use parentheses to force
your intention. This also makes it clear to those reading your code.

Repetition with while
A while loop continues as long as the controlling Boolean-expression
produces true:
while (Boolean-expression) {
// Code to be repeated
}

The Boolean expression is evaluated once at the beginning of the loop and
again before each further iteration.
// Summary1/While.kt
fun testCondition(i: Int) = i < 100
fun main() {
var i = 0
while (testCondition(i)) {
print(".")
i += 10
}
}
/* Output:
..........
*/

Kotlin infers Boolean as the result type for testCondition().
The short versions of assignment operators are available for all
mathematical operations (+=, -=, *=, /=, %=). Kotlin also supports the
increment and decrement operators ++ and --, in both prefix and postfix
form.
while can be used with the do keyword:
do {
// Code to be repeated

} while (Boolean-expression)

Rewriting While.kt:
// Summary1/DoWhile.kt
fun main() {
var i = 0
do {
print(".")
i += 10
} while (testCondition(i))
}
/* Output:
..........
*/

The sole difference between while and do-while is that the body of the dowhile always executes at least once, even if the Boolean expression
produces false the first time.

Looping & Ranges
Many programming languages index into an iterable object by stepping
through integers. Kotlin’s for allows you to take elements directly from
iterable objects like ranges and Strings. For example, this for selects each
character in the String "Kotlin":
// Summary1/StringIteration.kt
fun main() {
for (c in "Kotlin") {
print("$c ")
// c += 1 // error:
// val cannot be reassigned
}
}
/* Output:
K o t l i n
*/

c can’t be explicitly defined as either a var or val—Kotlin automatically
makes it a val and infers its type as Char (you can provide the type

explicitly, but in practice this is rarely done).

You can step through integral values using ranges:
// Summary1/RangeOfInt.kt

fun main() {
for (i in 1..10) {
print("$i ")
}
}
/* Output:
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
*/

Creating a range with .. includes both bounds, but until excludes the top
endpoint: 1 until 10 is the same as 1..9. You can specify an increment
value using step: 1..21 step 3.

The in Keyword
The same in that provides for loop iteration also allows you to check
membership in a range. !in returns true if the tested value isn’t in the
range:
// Summary1/Membership.kt
fun inNumRange(n: Int) = n in 50..100
fun notLowerCase(ch: Char) = ch !in 'a'..'z'
fun main() {
val i1 = 11
val i2 = 100
val c1 = 'K'
val c2 = 'k'
println("$i1 ${inNumRange(i1)}")
println("$i2 ${inNumRange(i2)}")
println("$c1 ${notLowerCase(c1)}")
println("$c2 ${notLowerCase(c2)}")
}
/* Output:
11 false
100 true
K true
k false
*/

in can also be used to test membership in floating-point ranges, although
such ranges can only be defined using .. and not until.

Expressions & Statements
The smallest useful fragment of code in most programming languages is
either a statement or an expression. These have one basic difference:

A statement changes state.
An expression expresses.
That is, an expression produces a result, while a statement does not.
Because it doesn’t return anything, a statement must change the state of its
surroundings (that is, create a side effect) to do anything useful.
Almost everything in Kotlin is an expression:
val hours = 10
val minutesPerHour = 60
val minutes = hours * minutesPerHour

In each case, everything to the right of the = is an expression, which
produces a result that is assigned to the identifier on the left.
Functions like println() don’t seem to produce a result, but because they
are still expressions, they must return something. Kotlin has a special Unit
type for these:
// Summary1/UnitReturn.kt
fun main() {
val result = println("returns Unit")
println(result)
}
/* Output:
returns Unit
kotlin.Unit
*/

Experienced programmers should go to Summary 2 after working the
exercises for this atom.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

SECTION II: INTRODUCTION TO OBJECTS
Objects are the foundation for numerous modern languages, including
Kotlin.
In an object-oriented (OO) programming language, you discover “nouns” in
the problem you’re solving, and translate those nouns to objects. Objects
hold data and perform actions. An object-oriented language creates and uses
objects.
Kotlin isn’t just object-oriented; it’s also functional. Functional languages
focus on the actions you perform (“verbs”). Kotlin is a hybrid objectfunctional language.
This section explains the basics of object-oriented programming.
Section IV: Functional Programming introduces functional
programming.
Section V: Object-Oriented Programming covers object-oriented
programming in detail.

Objects Everywhere
Objects store data using properties (vals and vars) and perform
operations with this data using functions.
Some definitions:
Class: Defines properties and functions for what is essentially a new
data type. Classes are also called user-defined types.
Member: Either a property or a function of a class.
Member function: A function that works only with a specific class of
object.
Creating an object: Making a val or var of a class. Also called
creating an instance of that class.
Because classes define state and behavior, we can even refer to instances of
built-in types like Double or Boolean as objects.
Consider Kotlin’s IntRange class:
// ObjectsEverywhere/IntRanges.kt
fun main() {
val r1 = IntRange(0, 10)
val r2 = IntRange(5, 7)
println(r1)
println(r2)
}
/* Output:
0..10
5..7
*/

We create two objects (instances) of the IntRange class. Each object has its
own piece of storage in memory. IntRange is a class, but a particular range
r1 from 0 to 10 is an object that is distinct from range r2.
Numerous operations are available for an IntRange object. Some are
straightforward, like sum(), and others require more understanding before

you can use them. If you try calling one that needs arguments, the IDE will
ask for those arguments.
To learn about a particular member function, look it up in the Kotlin
documentation. Notice the magnifying glass icon in the top right area of the
page. Click on that and type IntRange into the search box. Click on
kotlin.ranges > IntRange from the resulting search. You’ll see the
documentation for the IntRange class. You can study all the member
functions—the Application Programming Interface (API)—of the class.
Although you won’t understand most of it at this time, it’s helpful to
become comfortable looking things up in the Kotlin documentation.
An IntRange is a kind of object, and a defining characteristic of an object is
that you perform operations on it. Instead of “performing an operation,” we
say calling a member function. To call a member function for an object,
start with the object identifier, then a dot, then the name of the operation:
// ObjectsEverywhere/RangeSum.kt
fun main() {
val r = IntRange(0, 10)
println(r.sum())
}
/* Output:
55
*/

Because sum() is a member function defined for IntRange, you call it by
saying r.sum(). This adds up all the numbers in that IntRange.
Earlier object-oriented languages used the phrase “sending a message” to
describe calling a member function for an object. Sometimes you’ll still see
that terminology.
Classes can have many operations (member functions). It’s easy to explore
classes using an IDE (integrated development environment) that includes a
feature called code completion. For example, if you type .s after an object
identifier within IntelliJ IDEA, it shows all the members of that object that
begin with s:

Code Completion

Try using code completion on other objects. For example, you can reverse a
String or convert all the characters to lower case:
// ObjectsEverywhere/Strings.kt
fun main() {
val s = "AbcD"
println(s.reversed())
println(s.toLowerCase())
}
/* Output:
DcbA
abcd
*/

You can easily convert a String to an integer and back:
// ObjectsEverywhere/Conversion.kt
fun main() {
val s = "123"
println(s.toInt())
val i = 123
println(i.toString())
}
/* Output:
123
123
*/

Later in the book we discuss strategies to handle situations when the String
you want to convert doesn’t represent a correct integer value.

You can also convert from one numerical type to another. To avoid
confusion, conversions between number types are explicit. For example,
you convert an Int i to a Long by calling i.toLong(), or to a Double with
i.toDouble():
// ObjectsEverywhere/NumberConversions.kt
fun fraction(numerator: Long, denom: Long) =
numerator.toDouble() / denom
fun main() {
val num = 1
val den = 2
val f = fraction(num.toLong(), den.toLong())
println(f)
}
/* Output:
0.5
*/

Well-defined classes are easy for a programmer to understand, and produce
code that’s easy to read.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Creating Classes
Not only can you use predefined types like IntRange and String, you
can also create your own types of objects.
Indeed, creating new types comprises much of the activity in objectoriented programming. You create new types by defining classes.
An object is a piece of the solution for a problem you’re trying to solve.
Start by thinking of objects as expressing concepts. As a first
approximation, if you discover a “thing” in your problem, represent that
thing as an object in your solution.
Suppose you want to create a program to manage animals in a zoo. It makes
sense to categorize the different types of animals based on how they
behave, their needs, animals they get along with and those they fight with.
Everything different about a species of animal is captured in the
classification of that animal’s object. Kotlin uses the class keyword to
create a new type of object:
// CreatingClasses/Animals.kt
// Create some classes:
class Giraffe
class Bear
class Hippo
fun main() {
// Create some objects:
val g1 = Giraffe()
val g2 = Giraffe()
val b = Bear()
val h = Hippo()
// Each object() is unique:
println(g1)
println(g2)
println(h)
println(b)

}
/* Sample output:
Giraffe@28d93b30
Giraffe@1b6d3586

Hippo@4554617c
Bear@74a14482
*/

To define a class, start with the class keyword, followed by an identifier
for your new class. The class name must begin with a letter (A-Z, upper or
lower case), but can include things like numbers and underscores.
Following convention, we capitalize the first letter of a class name, and
lowercase the first letter of all vals and vars.
Animals.kt starts by defining three new classes, then creates four objects

(also called instances) of those classes.

Giraffe is a class, but a particular five-year-old male giraffe that lives in

Botswana is an object. Each object is different from all others, so we give
them names like g1 and g2.
Notice the rather cryptic output of the last four lines. The part before the @
is the class name, and the number after the @ is the address where the object
is located in your computer’s memory. Yes, that’s a number even though it
includes some letters—it’s called “hexadecimal notation”. Every object in
your program has its own unique address.
The classes defined here (Giraffe, Bear, and Hippo) are as simple as
possible: the entire class definition is a single line. More complex classes
use curly braces ({ and }) to create a class body containing the
characteristics and behaviors for that class.
A function defined within a class belongs to that class. In Kotlin, we call
these member functions of the class. Some object-oriented languages like
Java choose to call them methods, a term that came from early objectoriented languages like Smalltalk. To emphasize the functional nature of
Kotlin, the designers chose to drop the term method, as some beginners
found the distinction confusing. Instead, the term function is used
throughout the language.
If it is unambiguous, we will just say “function.” If we must make the
distinction:

Member functions belong to a class.
Top-level functions exist by themselves and are not part of a class.
Here, bark() belongs to the Dog class:
// CreatingClasses/Dog.kt
class Dog {
fun bark() = "yip!"
}
fun main() {
val dog = Dog()
}

In main(), we create a Dog object and assign it to val dog. Kotlin emits a
warning because we never use dog.
Member functions are called (invoked) with the object name, followed by a
. (dot/period), followed by the function name and parameter list. Here we
call the meow() function and display the result:
// CreatingClasses/Cat.kt
class Cat {
fun meow() = "mrrrow!"
}
fun main() {
val cat = Cat()
// Call 'meow()' for 'cat':
val m1 = cat.meow()
println(m1)
}
/* Output:
mrrrow!
*/

A member function acts on a particular instance of a class. When you call
meow(), you must call it with an object. During the call, meow() can access
other members of that object.
When calling a member function, Kotlin keeps track of the object of interest
by silently passing a reference to that object. That reference is available
inside the member function by using the keyword this.

Member functions have special access to other elements within a class,
simply by naming those elements. You can also explicitly qualify access to
those elements using this. Here, exercise() calls speak() with and
without qualification:
// CreatingClasses/Hamster.kt
class Hamster {
fun speak() = "Squeak! "
fun exercise() =
this.speak() +
// Qualified with 'this'
speak() +
// Without 'this'
"Running on wheel"
}
fun main() {
val hamster = Hamster()
println(hamster.exercise())
}
/* Output:
Squeak! Squeak! Running on wheel
*/

In exercise(), we call speak() first with an explicit this and then omit
the qualification.
Sometimes you’ll see code containing an unnecessary explicit this. That
kind of code often comes from programmers who know a different
language where this is either required, or part of its style. Using a feature
unnecessarily is confusing for the reader, who spends time trying to figure
out why you’re doing it. We recommend avoiding the unnecessary use of
this.
Outside the class, you must say hamster.exercise() and
hamster.speak().
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Properties
A property is a var or val that’s part of a class.
Defining a property maintains state within a class. Maintaining state is the
primary motivating reason for creating a class rather than just writing one
or more standalone functions.
A var property can be reassigned, while a val property can’t. Each object
gets its own storage for properties:
// Properties/Cup.kt
class Cup {
var percentFull = 0
}
fun main() {
val c1 = Cup()
c1.percentFull = 50
val c2 = Cup()
c2.percentFull = 100
println(c1.percentFull)
println(c2.percentFull)

}
/* Output:
50
100
*/

Defining a var or val inside a class looks just like defining it within a
function. However, the var or val becomes part of that class, and you must
refer to it by specifying its object using dot notation, placing a dot between
the object and the name of the property. You can see dot notation used for
each reference to percentFull.
The percentFull property represents the state of the corresponding Cup
object. c1.percentFull and c2.percentFull contain different values,
showing that each object has its own storage.

A member function can refer to a property within its object without using
dot notation (that is, without qualifying it):
// Properties/Cup2.kt
class Cup2 {
var percentFull = 0
val max = 100
fun add(increase: Int): Int {
percentFull += increase
if (percentFull > max)
percentFull = max
return percentFull
}
}
fun main() {
val cup = Cup2()
cup.add(50)
println(cup.percentFull)
cup.add(70)
println(cup.percentFull)
}
/* Output:
50
100
*/

The add() member function tries to add increase to percentFull but
ensures that it doesn’t go past 100%.
You must qualify both properties and member functions from outside a
class.
You can define top-level properties:
// Properties/TopLevelProperty.kt
val constant = 42
var counter = 0
fun inc() {
counter++
}

Defining a top-level val is safe because it cannot be modified. However,
defining a mutable (var) top-level property is considered an anti-pattern.
As your program becomes more complicated, it becomes harder to reason
correctly about shared mutable state. If everyone in your code base can
access the var counter, you can’t guarantee it will change correctly: while

inc() increases counter by one, some other part of the program might
decrease counter by ten, producing obscure bugs. It’s best to guard mutable

state within a class. In Constraining Visibility you’ll see how to make it
truly hidden.

To say that vars can be changed while vals cannot is an oversimplification.
As an analogy, consider a house as a val, and a sofa inside the house as a
var. You can modify sofa because it’s a var. You can’t reassign house,
though, because it’s a val:
// Properties/ChangingAVal.kt
class House {
var sofa: String = ""
}
fun main() {
val house = House()
house.sofa = "Simple sleeper sofa: $89.00"
println(house.sofa)
house.sofa = "New leather sofa: $3,099.00"
println(house.sofa)
// Cannot reassign the val to a new House:
// house = House()
}
/* Output:
Simple sleeper sofa: $89.00
New leather sofa: $3,099.00
*/

Although house is a val, its object can be modified because sofa in class
House is a var. Defining house as a val only prevents it from being
reassigned to a new object.
If we make a property a val, it cannot be reassigned:
// Properties/AnUnchangingVar.kt
class Sofa {
val cover: String = "Loveseat cover"
}
fun main() {
var sofa = Sofa()
// Not allowed:
// sofa.cover = "New cover"
// Reassigning a var:
sofa = Sofa()
}

Even though sofa is a var, its object cannot be modified because cover in
class Sofa is a val. However, sofa can be reassigned to a new object.
We’ve talked about identifiers like house and sofa as if they were objects.
They are actually references to objects. One way to see this is to observe
that two identifiers can refer to the same object:
// Properties/References.kt
class Kitchen {
var table: String = "Round table"
}
fun main() {
val kitchen1 = Kitchen()
val kitchen2 = kitchen1
println("kitchen1: ${kitchen1.table}")
println("kitchen2: ${kitchen2.table}")
kitchen1.table = "Square table"
println("kitchen1: ${kitchen1.table}")
println("kitchen2: ${kitchen2.table}")
}
/* Output:
kitchen1: Round table
kitchen2: Round table
kitchen1: Square table
kitchen2: Square table
*/

When kitchen1 modifies table, kitchen2 sees the modification.
kitchen1.table and kitchen2.table display the same output.
Remember that var and val control references rather than objects. A var
allows you to rebind a reference to a different object, and a val prevents
you from doing so.
Mutability means an object can change its state. In the examples above,
class House and class Kitchen define mutable objects while class Sofa
defines immutable objects.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Constructors
You initialize a new object by passing information to a constructor.
Each object is an isolated world. A program is a collection of objects, so
correct initialization of each individual object solves a large part of the
initialization problem. Kotlin includes mechanisms to guarantee proper
object initialization.
A constructor is like a special member function that initializes a new object.
The simplest form of a constructor is a single-line class definition:
// Constructors/Wombat.kt
class Wombat
fun main() {
val wombat = Wombat()
}

In main(), calling Wombat() creates a Wombat object. If you are coming
from another object-oriented language you might expect to see a new
keyword used here, but new would be redundant in Kotlin so it was omitted.
You pass information to a constructor using a parameter list, just like a
function. Here, the Alien constructor takes a single argument:
// Constructors/Arg.kt
class Alien(name: String) {
val greeting = "Poor $name!"
}
fun main() {
val alien = Alien("Mr. Meeseeks")
println(alien.greeting)
// alien.name // Error
// [1]
}
/* Output:
Poor Mr. Meeseeks!
*/

Creating an Alien object requires the argument (try it without one). name
initializes the greeting property within the constructor, but it is not
accessible outside the constructor—try uncommenting line [1].
If you want the constructor parameter to be accessible outside the class
body, define it as a var or val in the parameter list:
// Constructors/VisibleArgs.kt
class MutableNameAlien(var name: String)
class FixedNameAlien(val name: String)
fun main() {
val alien1 =
MutableNameAlien("Reverse Giraffe")
val alien2 =
FixedNameAlien("Krombopolis Michael")

}

alien1.name = "Parasite"
// Can't do this:
// alien2.name = "Parasite"

These class definitions have no explicit class bodies—the bodies are
implied.
When name is defined as a var or val, it becomes a property and is thus
accessible outside the constructor. val constructor parameters cannot be
changed, while var constructor parameters are mutable.
Your class can have numerous constructor parameters:
// Constructors/MultipleArgs.kt
class AlienSpecies(
val name: String,
val eyes: Int,
val hands: Int,
val legs: Int
) {
fun describe() =
"$name with $eyes eyes, " +
"$hands hands and $legs legs"
}
fun main() {
val kevin =
AlienSpecies("Zigerion", 2, 2, 2)
val mortyJr =
AlienSpecies("Gazorpian", 2, 6, 2)

println(kevin.describe())
println(mortyJr.describe())

}
/* Output:
Zigerion with 2 eyes, 2 hands and 2 legs
Gazorpian with 2 eyes, 6 hands and 2 legs
*/

In Complex Constructors, you’ll see that constructors can also contain
complex initialization logic.
If an object is used when a String is expected, Kotlin calls the object’s
toString() member function. If you don’t write one, you still get a default
toString():
// Constructors/DisplayAlienSpecies.kt
fun main() {
val krombopulosMichael =
AlienSpecies("Gromflomite", 2, 2, 2)
println(krombopulosMichael)
}
/* Sample output:
AlienSpecies@4d7e1886
*/

The default toString() isn’t very useful—it produces the class name and
the physical address of the object (this varies from one program execution
to the next). You can define your own toString():
// Constructors/Scientist.kt
class Scientist(val name: String) {
override fun toString(): String {
return "Scientist('$name')"
}
}
fun main() {
val zeep = Scientist("Zeep Xanflorp")
println(zeep)
}
/* Output:
Scientist('Zeep Xanflorp')
*/

override is a new keyword for us. It is required here because toString()
already has a definition, the one producing the primitive result. override
tells Kotlin that yes, we do actually want to replace the default toString()

with our own definition. The explicitness of override clarifies the code and
prevents mistakes.
A toString() that displays the contents of an object in a convenient form
is useful for finding and fixing programming errors. To simplify the process
of debugging, IDEs provide debuggers that allow you to observe each step
in the execution of a program and to see inside your objects.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Constraining Visibility
If you leave a piece of code for a few days or weeks, then come back
to it, you might see a much better way to write it.
This is one of the prime motivations for refactoring, which rewrites
working code to make it more readable, understandable, and thus
maintainable.
There is a tension in this desire to change and improve your code.
Consumers (client programmers) require aspects of your code to be stable.
You want to change it, and they want it to stay the same.
This is particularly important for libraries. Consumers of a library don’t
want to rewrite code for a new version of that library. However, the library
creator must be free to make modifications and improvements, with the
certainty that the client code won’t be affected by those changes.
Therefore, a primary consideration in software design is:
Separate things that change from things that stay the same.
To control visibility, Kotlin and some other languages provide access
modifiers. Library creators decide what is and is not accessible by the client
programmer using the modifiers public, private, protected, and
internal. This atom covers public and private, with a brief introduction
to internal. We explain protected later in the book.
An access modifier such as private appears before the definition for a
class, function, or property. An access modifier only controls access for that
particular definition.

A public definition is accessible by client programmers, so changes to that
definition impact client code directly. If you don’t provide a modifier, your
definition is automatically public, so public is technically redundant. You
will sometimes still specify public for the sake of clarity.
A private definition is hidden and only accessible from other members of
the same class. Changing, or even removing, a private definition doesn’t
directly impact client programmers.
private classes, top-level functions, and top-level properties are accessible

only inside that file:

// Visibility/RecordAnimals.kt
private var index = 0

// [1]

private class Animal(val name: String) // [2]
private fun recordAnimal(
// [3]
animal: Animal
) {
println("Animal #$index: ${animal.name}")
index++
}
fun recordAnimals() {
recordAnimal(Animal("Tiger"))
recordAnimal(Animal("Antelope"))
}
fun recordAnimalsCount() {
println("$index animals are here!")
}

You can access private top-level properties ([1]), classes ([2]), and
functions ([3]) from other functions and classes within RecordAnimals.kt.
Kotlin prevents you from accessing a private top-level element from
within another file, telling you it’s private in the file:
// Visibility/ObserveAnimals.kt
fun main() {
// Can't access private members
// declared in another file.
// Class is private:
// val rabbit = Animal("Rabbit")
// Function is private:
// recordAnimal(rabbit)
// Property is private:
// index++

recordAnimals()
recordAnimalsCount()

}
/* Output:
Animal #0: Tiger
Animal #1: Antelope
2 animals are here!
*/

Privacy is most commonly used for members of a class:
// Visibility/Cookie.kt
class Cookie(
private var isReady: Boolean
) {
private fun crumble() =
println("crumble")

}

// [1]
// [2]

public fun bite() =
println("bite")

// [3]

fun eat() {
isReady = true
crumble()
bite()
}

// [4]
// [5]

fun main() {
val x = Cookie(false)
x.bite()
// Can't access private members:
// x.isReady
// x.crumble()
x.eat()
}
/* Output:
bite
crumble
bite
*/

[1] A private property, not accessible outside the containing class.
[2] A private member function.
[3] A public member function, accessible to anyone.
[4] No access modifier means public.
[5] Only members of the same class can access private members.
The private keyword means no one can access that member except other
members of that class. Other classes cannot access private members, so
it’s as if you’re also insulating the class against yourself and your
collaborators. With private, you can freely change that member without

worrying whether it affects another class in the same package. As a library
designer you’ll typically keep things as private as possible, and expose
only functions and classes to client programmers.
Any member function that is a helper function for a class can be made
private to ensure you don’t accidentally use it elsewhere in the package
and thus prohibit yourself from changing or removing that function.
The same is true for a private property inside a class. Unless you must
expose the underlying implementation (which is less likely than you might
think), make properties private. However, just because a reference to an
object is private inside a class doesn’t mean some other object can’t have a
public reference to the same object:
// Visibility/MultipleRef.kt
class Counter(var start: Int) {
fun increment() {
start += 1
}
override fun toString() = start.toString()
}
class CounterHolder(counter: Counter) {
private val ctr = counter
override fun toString() =
"CounterHolder: " + ctr
}
fun main() {
val c = Counter(11)
// [1]
val ch = CounterHolder(c)
// [2]
println(ch)
c.increment()
// [3]
println(ch)
val ch2 = CounterHolder(Counter(9)) // [4]
println(ch2)
}
/* Output:
CounterHolder: 11
CounterHolder: 12
CounterHolder: 9
*/

[1] c is now defined in the scope surrounding the creation of the
CounterHolder object on the following line.
[2] Passing c as the argument to the CounterHolder constructor means
that the new CounterHolder now refers to the same Counter object
that c refers to.

[3] The Counter that is supposedly private inside ch can still be
manipulated via c.
[4] Counter(9) has no other references except within CounterHolder,
so it cannot be accessed or modified by anything except ch2.
Maintaining multiple references to a single object is called aliasing and can
produce surprising behavior.

Modules
Unlike the small examples in this book, real programs are often large. It can
be helpful to divide such programs into one or more modules. A module is a
logically independent part of a codebase. The way you divide a project into
modules depends on the build system (such as Gradle or Maven) and is
beyond the scope of this book.
An internal definition is accessible only inside the module where it is
defined. internal lands somewhere between private and public—use it
when private is too restrictive but you don’t want an element to be a part
of the public API. We do not use internal in the book’s examples or
exercises.
Modules are a higher-level concept. The following atom introduces
packages, which enable finer-grained structuring. A library is often a single
module consisting of multiple packages, so internal elements are available
within the library but are not accessible by consumers of that library.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Packages
A fundamental principle in programming is the acronym DRY: Don’t
Repeat Yourself.
Multiple identical pieces of code require maintenance whenever you make
fixes or improvements. So duplicating code is not just extra work—every
duplication creates opportunities for mistakes.
The import keyword reuses code from other files. One way to use import is
to specify a class, function or property name:
import packagename.ClassName
import packagename.functionName
import packagename.propertyName

A package is an associated collection of code. Each package is usually
designed to solve a particular problem, and often contains multiple
functions and classes. For example, we can import mathematical constants
and functions from the kotlin.math library:
// Packages/ImportClass.kt
import kotlin.math.PI
import kotlin.math.cos // Cosine
fun main() {
println(PI)
println(cos(PI))
println(cos(2 * PI))
}
/* Output:
3.141592653589793
-1.0
1.0
*/

Sometimes you want to use multiple third-party libraries containing classes
or functions with the same name. The as keyword allows you to change
names while importing:

// Packages/ImportNameChange.kt
import kotlin.math.PI as circleRatio
import kotlin.math.cos as cosine
fun main() {
println(circleRatio)
println(cosine(circleRatio))
println(cosine(2 * circleRatio))
}
/* Output:
3.141592653589793
-1.0
1.0
*/

as is useful if a library name is poorly chosen or excessively long.

You can fully qualify an import in the body of your code. In the following
example, the code might be less readable due to the explicit package names,
but the origin of each element is absolutely clear:
// Packages/FullyQualify.kt
fun main() {
println(kotlin.math.PI)
println(kotlin.math.cos(kotlin.math.PI))
println(kotlin.math.cos(2 * kotlin.math.PI))
}
/* Output:
3.141592653589793
-1.0
1.0
*/

To import everything from a package, use a star:
// Packages/ImportEverything.kt
import kotlin.math.*
fun main() {
println(E)
println(E.roundToInt())
println(E.toInt())
}
/* Output:
2.718281828459045
3
2
*/

The kotlin.math package contains a convenient roundToInt() that rounds
the Double value to the nearest integer, unlike toInt() which simply
truncates anything after a decimal point.

To reuse your code, create a package using the package keyword. The
package statement must be the first non-comment statement in the file.
package is followed by the name of your package, which by convention is
all lowercase:
// Packages/PythagoreanTheorem.kt
package pythagorean
import kotlin.math.sqrt
class RightTriangle(
val a: Double,
val b: Double
) {
fun hypotenuse() = sqrt(a * a + b * b)
fun area() = a * b / 2
}

You can name the source-code file anything you like, unlike Java which
requires the file name to be the same as the class name.
Kotlin allows you to choose any name for your package, but it’s considered
good style for the package name to be identical to the directory name where
the package files are located (this will not always be the case for the
examples in this book).
The elements in the pythagorean package are now available using import:
// Packages/ImportPythagorean.kt
import pythagorean.RightTriangle
fun main() {
val rt = RightTriangle(3.0, 4.0)
println(rt.hypotenuse())
println(rt.area())
}
/* Output:
5.0
6.0
*/

In the remainder of this book we use package statements for any file that
defines functions, classes, etc., outside of main(), to prevent name clashes
with other files in the book, but we usually won’t put a package statement
in a file that only contains a main().
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Testing
Constant testing is essential for rapid program development.
If changing one part of your code breaks other code, your tests reveal the
problem right away. If you don’t find out immediately, changes accumulate
and you can no longer tell which change caused the problem. You’ll spend a
lot longer tracking it down.
Testing is a crucial practice, so we introduce it early and use it throughout
the rest of the book. This way, you become accustomed to testing as a
standard part of the programming process.
Using println() to verify code correctness is a weak approach—you must
scrutinize the output every time and consciously ensure that it’s correct.
To simplify your experience while using this book, we created our own tiny
testing system. The goal is a minimal approach that:
1. Shows the expected result of expressions.
2. Provides output so you know the program is running, even when all
tests succeed.
3. Ingrains the concept of testing early in your practice.
Although useful for this book, ours is not a testing system for the
workplace. Others have toiled long and hard to create such test systems. For
example:
JUnit is one of the most popular Java test frameworks, and is easily
used from within Kotlin.
Kotest is designed specifically for Kotlin, and takes advantage of
Kotlin language features.
The Spek Framework produces a different form of testing, called
Specification Testing.

To use our testing framework, we must first import it. The basic elements
of the framework are eq (equals) and neq (not equals):
// Testing/TestingExample.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
val v1 = 11
val v2 = "Ontology"
// 'eq' means "equals":
v1 eq 11
v2 eq "Ontology"
// 'neq' means "not equal"
v2 neq "Epistimology"
// [Error] Epistimology != Ontology
// v2 eq "Epistimology"

}
/* Output:
11
Ontology
Ontology
*/

The code for the atomictest package is in Appendix A: AtomicTest. We
don’t intend that you understand everything in AtomicTest.kt right now,
because it uses some features that won’t appear until later in the book.
To produce a clean, comfortable appearance, AtomicTest uses a Kotlin
feature you haven’t seen yet: the ability to write a function call
a.function(b) in the text-like form a function b. This is called infix
notation. Only functions defined using the infix keyword can be called this
way. AtomicTest.kt defines the infix eq and neq used in
TestingExample.kt:
expression eq expected
expression neq expected

eq and neq are flexible—almost anything works as a test expression. If
expected is a String, then expression is converted to a String and the two
Strings are compared. Otherwise, expression and expected are compared

directly (without converting them first). In either case, the result of
expression appears on the console so you see something when the program
runs. Even when the tests succeed, you still see the result on the left of eq or

neq. If expression and expected are not equivalent, AtomicTest shows an

error when the program runs.

The last test in TestingExample.kt intentionally fails so you see an
example of failure output. If the two values are not equal, Kotlin displays
the corresponding message starting with [Error]. If you uncomment the
last line and run the example above, you will see, after all the successful
tests:
[Error] Epistimology != Ontology

The actual value stored in v2 is not what it is claimed to be in the
“expected” expression. AtomicTest displays the String representations for
both expected and actual values.
eq and neq are the basic (infix) functions defined for AtomicTest—it truly
is a minimal testing system. When you put eq and neq expressions in your

examples, you’ll create both a test and some console output. You verify the
correctness of the program by running it.

There’s a second tool in AtomicTest. The trace object captures output for
later comparison:
// Testing/Trace1.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
trace("line 1")
trace(47)
trace("line 2")
trace eq """
line 1
47
line 2
"""
}

Adding results to trace looks like a function call, so you can effectively
replace println() with trace().
In previous atoms, we displayed output and relied on human visual
inspection to catch any discrepancies. That’s unreliable; even in a book
where we scrutinize the code over and over, we’ve learned that visual

inspection can’t be trusted to find errors. From now on we rarely use
commented output blocks because AtomicTest will do everything for us.
However, sometimes we still include commented output blocks when that
produces a more useful effect.
Seeing the benefits of using testing throughout the rest of the book should
help you incorporate testing into your programming process. You’ll
probably start feeling uncomfortable when you see code that doesn’t have
tests. You might even decide that code without tests is broken by definition.

Testing as Part of Programming
Testing is most effective when it’s built into your software development
process. Writing tests ensures you get the results you expect. Many people
advocate writing tests before writing the implementation code—you first
make the test fail before you write the code to make it pass. This technique,
called Test Driven Development (TDD), is a way to ensure that you’re
really testing what you think you are. You’ll find a more complete
description of TDD on Wikipedia (search for “Test Driven Development”).
There’s another benefit to writing testably—it changes the way you craft
your code. You could just display the results on the console. But in the test
mindset you wonder, “How will I test this?” When you create a function,
you decide you should return something from the function, if for no other
reason than to test that result. Functions that do nothing but take input and
produce output tend to generate better designs, as well.
Here’s a simplified example using TDD to implement the BMI calculation
from Number Types. First, we write the tests, along with an initial
implementation that fails (because we haven’t yet implemented the
functionality):
// Testing/TDDFail.kt
package testing1
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
calculateBMI(160, 68) eq "Normal weight"
// calculateBMI(100, 68) eq "Underweight"
// calculateBMI(200, 68) eq "Overweight"
}

fun calculateBMI(lbs: Int, height: Int) =
"Normal weight"

Only the first test passes. The other tests fail and are commented. Next, we
add code to determine which weights are in which categories. Now all the
tests fail:
// Testing/TDDStillFails.kt
package testing2
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
// Everything fails:
// calculateBMI(160, 68) eq "Normal weight"
// calculateBMI(100, 68) eq "Underweight"
// calculateBMI(200, 68) eq "Overweight"
}
fun calculateBMI(
lbs: Int,
height: Int
): String {
val bmi = lbs / (height * height) * 703.07
return if (bmi < 18.5) "Underweight"
else if (bmi < 25) "Normal weight"
else "Overweight"
}

We’re using Ints instead of Doubles, producing a zero result. The tests
guide us to the fix:
// Testing/TDDWorks.kt
package testing3
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
calculateBMI(160.0, 68.0) eq "Normal weight"
calculateBMI(100.0, 68.0) eq "Underweight"
calculateBMI(200.0, 68.0) eq "Overweight"
}
fun calculateBMI(
lbs: Double,
height: Double
): String {
val bmi = lbs / (height * height) * 703.07
return if (bmi < 18.5) "Underweight"
else if (bmi < 25) "Normal weight"
else "Overweight"
}

You may choose to add additional tests for the boundary conditions.
In the exercises for this book, we include tests that your code must pass.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Exceptions
The word “exception” is used in the same sense as the phrase “I take
exception to that.”
An exceptional condition prevents the continuation of the current function
or scope. At the point the problem occurs, you might not know what to do
with it, but you cannot continue within the current context. You don’t have
enough information to fix the problem. So you must stop and hand the
problem to another context that’s able to take appropriate action.
This atom covers the basics of exceptions as an error-reporting mechanism.
In Section VI: Preventing Failure, we look at other ways to deal with
problems.
It’s important to distinguish an exceptional condition from a normal
problem. A normal problem has enough information in the current context
to cope with the issue. With an exceptional condition, you cannot continue
processing. All you can do is leave, relegating the problem to an external
context. This is what happens when you throw an exception. The exception
is the object that is “thrown” from the site of the error.
Consider toInt(), which converts a String to an Int. What happens if you
call this function for a String that doesn’t contain an integer value?
// Exceptions/ToIntException.kt
package exceptions
fun erroneousCode() {
// Uncomment this line to get an exception:
// val i = "1$".toInt()
// [1]
}
fun main() {
erroneousCode()
}

Uncommenting line [1] produces an exception. Here, the failing line is
commented so we don’t stop the book’s build, which checks whether each
example compiles and runs as expected.
When an exception is thrown, the path of execution—the one that can’t be
continued—stops, and the exception object ejects from the current context.
Here, it exits the context of erroneousCode() and goes out to the context of
main(). In this case, Kotlin only reports the error; the programmer has
presumably made a mistake and must fix the code.
When an exception isn’t caught, the program aborts and displays a stack
trace containing detailed information. Uncommenting line [1] in
ToIntException.kt, produces the following output:
Exception in thread "main" java.lang.NumberFormatException: For input s\
tring: "1$"
at java.lang.NumberFormatException.forInputString(NumberFormatExcepti\
on.java:65)
at java.lang.Integer.parseInt(Integer.java:580)
at java.lang.Integer.parseInt(Integer.java:615)
at ToIntExceptionKt.erroneousCode(at ToIntException.kt:6)
at ToIntExceptionKt.main(at ToIntException.kt:10)

The stack trace gives details such as the file and line where the exception
occurred, so you can quickly discover the issue. The last two lines show the
problem: in line 10 of main() we call erroneousCode(). Then, more
precisely, in line 6 of erroneousCode() we call toInt().
To avoid commenting and uncommenting code to display exceptions, we
use the capture() function from the AtomicTest package:
// Exceptions/IntroducingCapture.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
capture {
"1$".toInt()
} eq "NumberFormatException: " +
"""For input string: "1$""""
}

Using capture(), we compare the generated exception to the expected
error message. capture() isn’t very helpful for normal programming—it’s

designed specifically for this book, so you can see the exception and know
that the output has been checked by the book’s build system.
Another strategy when you can’t successfully produce the expected result is
to return null, which is a special constant denoting “no value.” You can
return null instead of a value of any type. Later in Nullable Types we
discuss the way null affects the type of the resulting expression.
The Kotlin standard library contains String.toIntOrNull() which
performs the conversion if the String contains an integer number, or
produces null if the conversion is impossible—null is a simple way to
indicate failure:
// Exceptions/IntroducingNull.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
"1$".toIntOrNull() eq null
}

Suppose we calculate average income over a period of months:
// Exceptions/AverageIncome.kt
package firstversion
import atomictest.*
fun averageIncome(income: Int, months: Int) =
income / months
fun main() {
averageIncome(3300, 3) eq 1100
capture {
averageIncome(5000, 0)
} eq "ArithmeticException: / by zero"
}

If months is zero, the division in averageIncome() throws an
ArithmeticException. Unfortunately, this doesn’t tell us anything about
why the error occurred, what the denominator means and whether it can
legally be zero in the first place. This is clearly a bug in the code—
averageIncome() should cope with a months of 0 in a way that prevents a
divide-by-zero error.
Let’s modify averageIncome() to produce more information about the
source of the problem. If months is zero, we can’t return a regular integer

value as a result. One strategy is to return null:
// Exceptions/AverageIncomeWithNull.kt
package withnull
import atomictest.eq
fun averageIncome(income: Int, months: Int) =
if (months == 0)
null
else
income / months
fun main() {
averageIncome(3300, 3) eq 1100
averageIncome(5000, 0) eq null
}

If a function can return null, Kotlin requires that you check the result
before using it (this is covered in Nullable Types). Even if you only want to
display output to the user, it’s better to say “No full month periods have
passed,” rather than “Your average income for the period is: null.”
Instead of executing averageIncome() with the wrong arguments, you can
throw an exception—escape and force some other part of the program to
manage the issue. You could just allow the default ArithmeticException,
but it’s often more useful to throw a specific exception with a detailed error
message. When, after a couple of years in production, your application
suddenly throws an exception because a new feature calls averageIncome()
without properly checking the arguments, you’ll be grateful for that
message:
// Exceptions/AverageIncomeWithException.kt
package properexception
import atomictest.*
fun averageIncome(income: Int, months: Int) =
if (months == 0)
throw IllegalArgumentException(
// [1]
"Months can't be zero")
else
income / months
fun main() {
averageIncome(3300, 3) eq 1100
capture {
averageIncome(5000, 0)
} eq "IllegalArgumentException: " +
"Months can't be zero"
}

[1] When throwing an exception, the throw keyword is followed by
the exception to be thrown, along with any arguments it might need.
Here we use the standard exception class IllegalArgumentException.
Your goal is to generate the most useful messages possible to simplify the
support of your application in the future. Later you’ll learn to define your
own exception types and make them specific to your circumstances.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Lists
A List is a container, which is an object that holds other objects.
Containers are also called collections. When we need a basic container for
the examples in this book, we normally use a List.
Lists are part of the standard Kotlin package so they don’t require an
import.

The following example creates a List populated with Ints by calling the
standard library function listOf() with initialization values:
// Lists/Lists.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val ints = listOf(99, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13)
ints eq "[99, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13]"
// [1]
// Select each element in the List:
var result = ""
for (i in ints) {
// [2]
result += "$i "
}
result eq "99 3 5 7 11 13"

}

// "Indexing" into the List:
ints[4] eq 11

// [3]

[1] A List uses square brackets when displaying itself.
[2] for loops work well with Lists: for(i in ints) means i receives
each value in ints. You don’t declare val i or give its type; Kotlin
knows from the context that i is a for loop identifier.
[3] Square brackets index into a List. A List keeps its elements in
initialization order, and you select them individually by number. Like
most programming languages, Kotlin starts indexing at element zero,
which in this case produces the value 99. Thus an index of 4 produces
the value 11.

Forgetting that indexing starts at zero produces the so-called off-by-one
error. In a language like Kotlin we often don’t select elements one at a time,
but instead iterate through an entire container using in. This eliminates offby-one errors.
If you use an index beyond the last element in a List, Kotlin throws an
ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException:
// Lists/OutOfBounds.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
val ints = listOf(1, 2, 3)
capture {
ints[3]
} contains
listOf("ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException")
}

A List can hold all different types. Here’s a List of Doubles and a List of
Strings:
// Lists/ListUsefulFunction.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val doubles =
listOf(1.1, 2.2, 3.3, 4.4)
doubles.sum() eq 11.0

}

val strings = listOf("Twas", "Brillig",
"And", "Slithy", "Toves")
strings eq listOf("Twas", "Brillig",
"And", "Slithy", "Toves")
strings.sorted() eq listOf("And",
"Brillig", "Slithy", "Toves", "Twas")
strings.reversed() eq listOf("Toves",
"Slithy", "And", "Brillig", "Twas")
strings.first() eq "Twas"
strings.takeLast(2) eq
listOf("Slithy", "Toves")

This shows some of List’s operations. Note the name “sorted” instead of
“sort.” When you call sorted() it produces a new List containing the same
elements as the old, in sorted order—but it leaves the original List alone.
Calling it “sort” implies that the original List is changed directly (a.k.a.
sorted in place). Throughout Kotlin, you see this tendency of “leaving the

original object alone and producing a new object.” reversed() also
produces a new List.

Parameterized Types
We consider it good practice to use type inference—it tends to make the
code cleaner and easier to read. Sometimes, however, Kotlin complains that
it can’t figure out what type to use, and in other cases explicitness makes
the code more understandable. Here’s how we tell Kotlin the type contained
by a List:
// Lists/ParameterizedTypes.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
// Type is inferred:
val numbers = listOf(1, 2, 3)
val strings =
listOf("one", "two", "three")
// Exactly the same, but explicitly typed:
val numbers2: List<Int> = listOf(1, 2, 3)
val strings2: List<String> =
listOf("one", "two", "three")
numbers eq numbers2
strings eq strings2
}

Kotlin uses the initialization values to infer that numbers contains a List of
Ints, while strings contains a List of Strings.
numbers2 and strings2 are explicitly-typed versions of numbers and
strings, created by adding the type declarations List<Int> and
List<String>. You haven’t seen angle brackets before—they denote a type

parameter, allowing you to say, “this container holds ‘parameter’ objects.”
We pronounce List<Int> as “List of Int.”

Type parameters are useful for components other than containers, but you
often see them with container-like objects.
Return values can also have type parameters:
// Lists/ParameterizedReturn.kt
package lists
import atomictest.eq
// Return type is inferred:

fun inferred(p: Char, q: Char) =
listOf(p, q)
// Explicit return type:
fun explicit(p: Char, q: Char): List<Char> =
listOf(p, q)
fun main() {
inferred('a', 'b') eq "[a, b]"
explicit('y', 'z') eq "[y, z]"
}

Kotlin infers the return type for inferred(), while explicit() specifies
the function return type. You can’t just say it returns a List; Kotlin will
complain, so you must give the type parameter as well. When you specify
the return type of a function, Kotlin enforces your intention.

Read-Only and Mutable Lists
If you don’t explicitly say you want a mutable List, you won’t get one.
listOf() produces a read-only List that has no mutating functions.
If you’re creating a List gradually (that is, you don’t have all the elements
at creation time), use mutableListOf(). This produces a MutableList that
can be modified:
// Lists/MutableList.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = mutableListOf<Int>()
list.add(1)
list.addAll(listOf(2, 3))
list += 4
list += listOf(5, 6)
}

list eq listOf(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)

You can add elements to a MutableList using add() and addAll(), or the
shortcut += which adds a single element or another collection. Because list
has no initial elements, we must tell Kotlin what type it is by providing the
<Int> specification in the call to mutableListOf().
A MutableList can be treated as a List, in which case it cannot be
changed. You can’t, however, treat a read-only List as a MutableList:

// Lists/MutListIsList.kt
package lists
import atomictest.eq
fun getList(): List<Int> {
return mutableListOf(1, 2, 3)
}
fun main() {
// getList() produces a read-only List:
val list = getList()
// list += 3 // Error
list eq listOf(1, 2, 3)
}

Note that list lacks mutation functions despite being originally created
using mutableListOf() inside getList(). During the return, the result
type becomes a List<Int>. The original object is still a MutableList, but it
is viewed through the lens of a List.
A List is read-only—you can read its contents but not write to it. If the
underlying implementation is a MutableList and you retain a mutable
reference to that implementation, you can still modify it via that mutable
reference, and any read-only references will see those changes. This is
another example of aliasing, introduced in Constraining Visibility:
// Lists/MultipleListRefs.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val first = mutableListOf(1)
val second: List<Int> = first
second eq listOf(1)

}

first += 2
// second sees the change:
second eq listOf(1, 2)

first is an immutable reference (val) to the mutable object produced by
mutableListOf(1). Then second is aliased to first, so it is a view of that
same object. second is read-only because List<Int> does not include
modification functions. Note that, without the explicit List<Int> type
declaration, Kotlin would infer that second was also a reference to a

mutable object.

We’re able to add an element (2) to the object because first is a reference
to a mutable List. Note that second observes these changes—it cannot

change the List although the List changes via first.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Variable Argument Lists
The vararg keyword produces a flexibly-sized argument list.
In Lists we introduced listOf(), which takes any number of parameters
and produces a List:
// Varargs/ListOf.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
listOf(1) eq "[1]"
listOf("a", "b") eq "[a, b]"
}

Using the vararg keyword, you can define a function that takes any number
of arguments, just like listOf() does. vararg is short for variable
argument list:
// Varargs/VariableArgList.kt
package varargs
fun v(s: String, vararg d: Double) {}
fun main() {
v("abc", 1.0, 2.0)
v("def", 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0)
v("ghi", 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 6.0)
}

A function definition may specify only one parameter as vararg. Although
it’s possible to specify any item in the parameter list as vararg, it’s usually
simplest to do it for the last one.
vararg allows you to pass any number (including zero) of arguments. All
arguments must be of the specified type. vararg arguments are accessed
using the parameter name, which becomes an Array:
// Varargs/VarargSum.kt
package varargs
import atomictest.eq
fun sum(vararg numbers: Int): Int {

}

var total = 0
for (n in numbers) {
total += n
}
return total

fun main() {
sum(13, 27, 44) eq 84
sum(1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11) eq 36
sum() eq 0
}

Although Arrays and Lists look similar, they are implemented differently
—List is a regular library class while Array has special low-level support.
Array comes from Kotlin’s requirement for compatibility with other
languages, especially Java.
In day-to-day programming, use a List when you need a simple sequence.
Use Arrays only when a third-party API requires an Array, or when you’re
dealing with varargs.
In most cases you can just ignore the fact that vararg produces an Array
and treat it as if it were a List:
// Varargs/VarargLikeList.kt
package varargs
import atomictest.eq
fun evaluate(vararg ints: Int) =
"Size: ${ints.size}\n" +
"Sum: ${ints.sum()}\n" +
"Average: ${ints.average()}"
fun main() {
evaluate(10, -3, 8, 1, 9) eq """
Size: 5
Sum: 25
Average: 5.0
"""
}

You can pass an Array of elements wherever a vararg is accepted. To
create an Array, use arrayOf() in the same way you use listOf(). Note
that an Array is always mutable. To convert an Array into a sequence of
arguments (not just a single element of type Array), use the spread
operator, *:

// Varargs/SpreadOperator.kt
import varargs.sum
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val array = intArrayOf(4, 5)
sum(1, 2, 3, *array, 6) eq 21
// Doesn't compile:
// sum(1, 2, 3, array, 6)

}

val list = listOf(9, 10, 11)
sum(*list.toIntArray()) eq 30

// [1]

// [2]

If you pass an Array of primitive types (like Int, Double or Boolean) as in
the example above, the Array creation function must be specifically typed.
If you use arrayOf(4, 5) instead of intArrayOf(4, 5), line [1] will
produce an error complaining that inferred type is Array<Int> but IntArray
was expected.
The spread operator only works with arrays. If you have a List that you
want to pass as a sequence of arguments, first convert it to an Array and
then apply the spread operator, as in [2]. Because the result is an Array of a
primitive type, we must again use the specific conversion function
toIntArray().
The spread operator is especially helpful when you must pass vararg
arguments to another function that also expects varargs:
// Varargs/TwoFunctionsWithVarargs.kt
package varargs
import atomictest.eq
fun first(vararg numbers: Int): String {
var result = ""
for (i in numbers) {
result += "[$i]"
}
return result
}
fun second(vararg numbers: Int) =
first(*numbers)
fun main() {
second(7, 9, 32) eq "[7][9][32]"
}

Command-Line Arguments

When invoking a program on the command line, you can pass it a variable
number of arguments. To capture command-line arguments, you must
provide a particular parameter to main():
// Varargs/MainArgs.kt
fun main(args: Array<String>) {
for (a in args) {
println(a)
}
}

The parameter is traditionally called args (although you can call it
anything), and the type for args can only be Array<String> (Array of
String).
If you are using IntelliJ IDEA, you can pass program arguments by editing
the corresponding “Run configuration,” as shown in the last exercise for
this atom.
You can also use the kotlinc compiler to produce a command-line
program. If kotlinc isn’t on your computer, follow the instructions on the
Kotlin main site. Once you’ve entered and saved the code for MainArgs.kt,
type the following at a command prompt:
kotlinc MainArgs.kt

You provide the command-line arguments following the program
invocation, like this:
kotlin MainArgsKt hamster 42 3.14159

You’ll see this output:
hamster
42
3.14159

If you want to turn a String parameter into a specific type, Kotlin provides
conversion functions, such as a toInt() for converting to an Int, and
toFloat() for converting to a Float. Using these assumes that the
command-line arguments appear in a particular order. Here, the program

expects a String, followed by something convertible to an Int, followed by
something convertible to a Float:
// Varargs/MainArgConversion.kt
fun main(args: Array<String>) {
if (args.size < 3) return
val first = args[0]
val second = args[1].toInt()
val third = args[2].toFloat()
println("$first $second $third")
}

The first line in main() quits the program if there aren’t enough arguments.
If you don’t provide something convertible to an Int and a Float as the
second and third command-line arguments, you will see runtime errors (try
it to see the errors).
Compile and run MainArgConversion.kt with the same command-line
arguments we used before, and you’ll see:
hamster 42 3.14159

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Sets
A Set is a collection that allows only one element of each value.
The most common Set activity is to test for membership using in or
contains():
// Sets/Sets.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val intSet = setOf(1, 1, 2, 3, 9, 9, 4)
// No duplicates:
intSet eq setOf(1, 2, 3, 4, 9)
// Element order is unimportant:
setOf(1, 2) eq setOf(2, 1)
// Set membership:
(9 in intSet) eq true
(99 in intSet) eq false
intSet.contains(9) eq true
intSet.contains(99) eq false
// Does this set contain another set?
intSet.containsAll(setOf(1, 9, 2)) eq true
// Set union:
intSet.union(setOf(3, 4, 5, 6)) eq
setOf(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9)
// Set intersection:
intSet intersect setOf(0, 1, 2, 7, 8) eq
setOf(1, 2)

}

// Set difference:
intSet subtract setOf(0, 1, 9, 10) eq
setOf(2, 3, 4)
intSet - setOf(0, 1, 9, 10) eq
setOf(2, 3, 4)

This example shows:
1. Placing duplicate items into a Set automatically removes those
duplicates.

2. Element order is not important for sets. Two sets are equal if they
contain the same elements.
3. Both in and contains() test for membership.
4. You can perform the usual Venn-diagram operations like checking for
subset, union, intersection and difference, using either dot notation
(set.union(other)) or infix notation (set intersect other). The
functions union, intersect and subtract can be used with infix
notation.
5. Set difference can be expressed with either subtract() or the minus
operator.
To remove duplicates from a List, convert it to a Set:
// Sets/RemoveDuplicates.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(3, 3, 2, 1, 2)
list.toSet() eq setOf(1, 2, 3)
list.distinct() eq listOf(3, 2, 1)
"abbcc".toSet() eq setOf('a', 'b', 'c')
}

You can also use distinct(), which returns a List. You may call toSet()
on a String to convert it into a set of unique characters.
As with List, Kotlin provides two creation functions for Set. The result of
setOf() is read-only. To create a mutable Set, use mutableSetOf():
// Sets/MutableSet.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val mutableSet = mutableSetOf<Int>()
mutableSet += 42
mutableSet += 42
mutableSet eq setOf(42)
mutableSet -= 42
mutableSet eq setOf<Int>()
}

The operators += and -= add and remove elements to Sets, just as with
Lists.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Maps
A Map connects keys to values and looks up a value when given a key.
You create a Map by providing key-value pairs to mapOf(). Using to, we
separate each key from its associated value:
// Maps/Maps.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val constants = mapOf(
"Pi" to 3.141,
"e" to 2.718,
"phi" to 1.618
)
constants eq
"{Pi=3.141, e=2.718, phi=1.618}"
// Look up a value from a key:
constants["e"] eq 2.718
// [1]
constants.keys eq setOf("Pi", "e", "phi")
constants.values eq "[3.141, 2.718, 1.618]"
var s = ""
// Iterate through key-value pairs:
for (entry in constants) {
// [2]
s += "${entry.key}=${entry.value}, "
}
s eq "Pi=3.141, e=2.718, phi=1.618,"

}

s = ""
// Unpack during iteration:
for ((key, value) in constants)
// [3]
s += "$key=$value, "
s eq "Pi=3.141, e=2.718, phi=1.618,"

[1] The [] operator looks up a value using a key. You can produce all
the keys using keys and all the values using values. Calling keys
produces a Set because all keys in a Map must be unique, otherwise
you’d have ambiguity during a lookup.
[2] Iterating through a Map produces key-value pairs as map entries.
[3] You can unpack keys and values as you iterate.

A plain Map is read-only. Here’s a MutableMap:
// Maps/MutableMaps.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val m =
mutableMapOf(5 to "five", 6 to "six")
m[5] eq "five"
m[5] = "5ive"
m[5] eq "5ive"
m += 4 to "four"
m eq mapOf(5 to "5ive",
4 to "four", 6 to "six")
}

map[key] = value adds or changes the value associated with key. You can
also explicitly add a pair by saying map += key to value.
mapOf() and mutableMapOf() preserve the order in which the elements are
put into the Map. This is not guaranteed for other types of Map.

A read-only Map doesn’t allow mutations:
// Maps/ReadOnlyMaps.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val m = mapOf(5 to "five", 6 to "six")
m[5] eq "five"
// m[5] = "5ive" // Fails
// m += (4 to "four") // Fails
m + (4 to "four") // Doesn't change m
m eq mapOf(5 to "five", 6 to "six")
val m2 = m + (4 to "four")
m2 eq mapOf(
5 to "five", 6 to "six", 4 to "four")
}

The definition of m creates a Map associating Ints with Strings. If we try to
replace a String, Kotlin emits an error.
An expression with + creates a new Map that includes both the old elements
and the new one, but doesn’t affect the original Map. The only way to “add”
an element to a read-only Map is by creating a new Map.
A Map returns null if it doesn’t contain an entry for a given key. If you need
a result that can’t be null, use getValue() and catch

NoSuchElementException if the key is missing:
// Maps/GetValue.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
val map = mapOf('a' to "attempt")
map['b'] eq null
capture {
map.getValue('b')
} eq "NoSuchElementException: " +
"Key b is missing in the map."
map.getOrDefault('a', "??") eq "attempt"
map.getOrDefault('b', "??") eq "??"
}

getOrDefault() is usually a nicer alternative to null or an exception.

You can store class instances as values in a Map. Here’s a map that retrieves
a Contact using a number String:
// Maps/ContactMap.kt
package maps
import atomictest.eq
class Contact(
val name: String,
val phone: String
) {
override fun toString(): String {
return "Contact('$name', '$phone')"
}
}
fun main() {
val miffy = Contact("Miffy", "1-234-567890")
val cleo = Contact("Cleo", "098-765-4321")
val contacts = mapOf(
miffy.phone to miffy,
cleo.phone to cleo)
contacts["1-234-567890"] eq miffy
contacts["1-111-111111"] eq null
}

It’s possible to use class instances as keys in a Map, but that’s trickier so we
discuss it later in the book.
Maps look like simple little databases. They are sometimes called

associative arrays, because they associate keys with values. Although they

are quite limited compared to a full-featured database, they are nonetheless
remarkably useful (and far more efficient than a database).
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Property Accessors
To read a property, use its name. To assign a value to a mutable
property, use the assignment operator =.
This reads and writes the property i:
// PropertyAccessors/Data.kt
package propertyaccessors
import atomictest.eq
class Data(var i: Int)
fun main() {
val data = Data(10)
data.i eq 10 // Read the 'i' property
data.i = 20 // Write to the 'i' property
}

This appears to be straightforward access to the piece of storage named i.
However, Kotlin calls functions to perform the read and write operations.
As you expect, the default behavior of those functions reads and writes the
data stored in i. In this atom you’ll learn to write your own property
accessors to customize the reading and writing actions.
The accessor used to get the value of a property is called a getter. You
create a getter by defining get() immediately after the property definition.
The accessor used to modify a mutable property is called a setter. You
create a setter by defining set() immediately after the property definition.
The property accessors defined in the following example imitate the default
implementations generated by Kotlin. We display additional information so
you can see that the property accessors are indeed called during reads and
writes. We indent get() and set() to visually associate them with the
property, but the actual association happens because get() and set() are
defined immediately after that property (Kotlin doesn’t care about the
indentation):

// PropertyAccessors/Default.kt
package propertyaccessors
import atomictest.*
class Default {
var i: Int = 0
get() {
trace("get()")
return field
// [1]
}
set(value) {
trace("set($value)")
field = value
// [2]
}
}
fun main() {
val d = Default()
d.i = 2
trace(d.i)
trace eq """
set(2)
get()
2
"""
}

The definition order for get() and set() is unimportant. You can define
get() without defining set(), and vice-versa.
The default behavior for a property returns its stored value from a getter and
modifies it with a setter—the actions of [1] and [2]. Inside the getter and
setter, the stored value is manipulated indirectly using the field keyword,
which is only accessible within these two functions.
This next example uses the default implementation of the getter and adds a
setter to trace changes to the property n:
// PropertyAccessors/LogChanges.kt
package propertyaccessors
import atomictest.*
class LogChanges {
var n: Int = 0
set(value) {
trace("$field becomes $value")
field = value
}
}
fun main() {
val lc = LogChanges()
lc.n eq 0
lc.n = 2

}

lc.n eq 2
trace eq "0 becomes 2"

If you define a property as private, both accessors become private. You
can also make the setter private and the getter public. Then you can read
the property outside the class, but only change its value inside the class:
// PropertyAccessors/Counter.kt
package propertyaccessors
import atomictest.eq
class Counter {
var value: Int = 0
private set
fun inc() = value++
}
fun main() {
val counter = Counter()
repeat(10) {
counter.inc()
}
counter.value eq 10
}

Using private set, we control the value property so it can only be
incremented by one.
Normal properties store their data in a field. You can also create a property
that doesn’t have a field:
// PropertyAccessors/Hamsters.kt
package propertyaccessors
import atomictest.eq
class Hamster(val name: String)
class Cage(private val maxCapacity: Int) {
private val hamsters =
mutableListOf<Hamster>()
val capacity: Int
get() = maxCapacity - hamsters.size
val full: Boolean
get() = hamsters.size == maxCapacity
fun put(hamster: Hamster): Boolean =
if (full)
false
else {
hamsters += hamster
true
}
fun take(): Hamster =
hamsters.removeAt(0)

}
fun main() {
val cage = Cage(2)
cage.full eq false
cage.capacity eq 2
cage.put(Hamster("Alice")) eq true
cage.put(Hamster("Bob")) eq true
cage.full eq true
cage.capacity eq 0
cage.put(Hamster("Charlie")) eq false
cage.take()
cage.capacity eq 1
}

The properties capacity and full contain no underlying state—they are
computed at the time of each access. Both capacity and full are similar to
functions, and you can define them as such:
// PropertyAccessors/Hamsters2.kt
package propertyaccessors
class Cage2(private val maxCapacity: Int) {
private val hamsters =
mutableListOf<Hamster>()
fun capacity(): Int =
maxCapacity - hamsters.size
fun isFull(): Boolean =
hamsters.size == maxCapacity
}

In this case, using properties improves readability because capacity and
fullness are properties of the cage. However, don’t just convert all your
functions to properties—first, see how they read.
The Kotlin style guide prefers properties over functions when the value is
cheap to calculate and the property returns the same result for each
invocation as long as the object state hasn’t changed.
Property accessors provide a kind of protection for properties. Many objectoriented languages rely on making a physical field private to control
access to that property. With property accessors you can add code to control
or modify that access, while allowing anyone to use a property.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Summary 2
This atom summarizes and reviews the atoms in Section II, from
Objects Everywhere through Property Accessors.
If you’re an experienced programmer, this is your next atom after Summary
1, and you will go through the atoms sequentially after this.
New programmers should read this atom and perform the exercises as
review. If any information here isn’t clear to you, go back and study the
atom for that topic.
The topics appear in appropriate order for experienced programmers, which
is not the same as the order of the atoms in the book. For example, we start
by introducing packages and imports so we can use our minimal test
framework for the rest of the atom.

Packages & Testing
Any number of reusable library components can be bundled under a single
library name using the package keyword:
// Summary2/ALibrary.kt
package com.yoururl.libraryname
// Components to reuse ...
fun f() = "result"

You can put multiple components in a single file, or spread components out
among multiple files under the same package name. Here we’ve defined
f() as the sole component.
To make it unique, the package name conventionally begins with your
reversed domain name. In this example, the domain name is yoururl.com.

In Kotlin, the package name can be independent from the directory where
its contents are located. Java requires that the directory structure correspond
to the fully-qualified package name, so the package
com.yoururl.libraryname should be located under the
com/yoururl/libraryname directory. For mixed Kotlin and Java projects,
Kotlin’s style guide recommends the same practice. For pure Kotlin
projects, put the directory libraryname at the top level of your project’s
directory structure.
An import statement brings one or more names into the current namespace:
// Summary2/UseALibrary.kt
import com.yoururl.libraryname.*
fun main() {
val x = f()
}

The star after libraryname tells Kotlin to import all the components of a
library. You can also select components individually; details are in
Packages.
In the remainder of this book we use package statements for any file that
defines functions, classes, etc., outside of main(). This prevents name
clashes with other files in the book. We usually won’t put a package
statement in a file that only contains a main().
An important library for this book is atomictest, our simple testing
framework. atomictest is defined in Appendix A: AtomicTest, although it
uses language features you will not understand at this point in the book.
After importing atomictest, you use eq (equals) and neq (not equals)
almost as if they were language keywords:
// Summary2/UsingAtomicTest.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
val pi = 3.14
val pie = "A round dessert"
pi eq 3.14
pie eq "A round dessert"
pi neq pie
}
/* Output:

3.14
A round dessert
3.14
*/

The ability to use eq/neq without any dots or parentheses is called infix
notation. You can call infix functions either in the regular way:
pi.eq(3.14), or using infix notation: pi eq 3.14. Both eq and neq are
assertions of truth that also display the result from the left side of the eq/neq
statement, and an error message if the expression on the right of the eq isn’t
equivalent to the left (or is equivalent, in the case of neq). This way you see
verified results in the source code.
atomictest.trace uses function-call syntax for adding results, which can
then be validated using eq:
// Testing/UsingTrace.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
trace("Hello,")
trace(47)
trace("World!")
trace eq """
Hello,
47
World!
"""
}

You can effectively replace println() with trace().

Objects Everywhere
Kotlin is a hybrid object-functional language: it supports both objectoriented and functional programming paradigms.
Objects contain vals and vars to store data (these are called properties) and
perform operations using functions defined within a class, called member
functions (when it’s unambiguous, we just say “functions”). A class defines
properties and member functions for what is essentially a new, user-defined
data type. When you create a val or var of a class, it’s called creating an
object or creating an instance.

An especially useful type of object is the container, also called collection.
A container is an object that holds other objects. In this book, we often use
the List because it’s the most general-purpose sequence. Here we perform
several operations on a List that holds Doubles. listOf() creates a new
List from its arguments:
// Summary2/ListCollection.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val lst = listOf(19.2, 88.3, 22.1)
lst[1] eq 88.3 // Indexing
lst.reversed() eq listOf(22.1, 88.3, 19.2)
lst.sorted() eq listOf(19.2, 22.1, 88.3)
lst.sum() eq 129.6
}

No import statement is required to use a List.
Kotlin uses square brackets for indexing into sequences. Indexing is zerobased.
This example also shows a few of the many standard library functions
available for Lists: sorted(), reversed(), and sum(). To understand these
functions, consult the online Kotlin documentation.
When you call sorted() or reversed(), lst is not modified. Instead, a
new List is created and returned, containing the desired result. This
approach of never modifying the original object is consistent throughout
Kotlin libraries and you should endeavor to follow this pattern when writing
your own code.

Creating Classes
A class definition consists of the class keyword, a name for the class, and
an optional body. The body contains property definitions (vals and vars)
and function definitions.
This example defines a NoBody class without a body, and classes with val
properties:
// Summary2/ClassBodies.kt
package summary2

class NoBody
class SomeBody {
val name = "Janet Doe"
}
class EveryBody {
val all = listOf(SomeBody(),
SomeBody(), SomeBody())
}
fun main() {
val nb = NoBody()
val sb = SomeBody()
val eb = EveryBody()
}

To create an instance of a class, put parentheses after its name, along with
arguments if those are required.
Properties within class bodies can be any type. SomeBody contains a
property of type String, and EveryBody’s property is a List holding
SomeBody objects.
Here’s a class with member functions:
// Summary2/Temperature.kt
package summary2
import atomictest.eq
class Temperature {
var current = 0.0
var scale = "f"
fun setFahrenheit(now: Double) {
current = now
scale = "f"
}
fun setCelsius(now: Double) {
current = now
scale = "c"
}
fun getFahrenheit(): Double =
if (scale == "f")
current
else
current * 9.0 / 5.0 + 32.0
fun getCelsius(): Double =
if (scale == "c")
current
else
(current - 32.0) * 5.0 / 9.0
}
fun main() {

}

val temp = Temperature()
// [1]
temp.setFahrenheit(98.6)
temp.getFahrenheit() eq 98.6
temp.getCelsius() eq 37.0
temp.setCelsius(100.0)
temp.getFahrenheit() eq 212.0

These member functions are just like the top-level functions we’ve defined
outside of classes, except they belong to the class and have unqualified
access to the other members of the class, such as current and scale.
Member functions can also call other member functions in the same class
without qualification.
[1] Although temp is a val, we later modify the Temperature object.
The val definition prevents the reference temp from being reassigned
to a new object, but it does not restrict the behavior of the object itself.
The following two classes are the foundation of a tic-tac-toe game:
// Summary2/TicTacToe.kt
package summary2
import atomictest.eq
class Cell {
var entry = ' '
fun setValue(e: Char): String =
if (entry == ' ' &&
(e == 'X' || e == 'O')) {
entry = e
"Successful move"
} else
"Invalid move"
}

// [1]
// [2]

class Grid {
val cells = listOf(
listOf(Cell(), Cell(), Cell()),
listOf(Cell(), Cell(), Cell()),
listOf(Cell(), Cell(), Cell())
)
fun play(e: Char, x: Int, y: Int): String =
if (x !in 0..2 || y !in 0..2)
"Invalid move"
else
cells[x][y].setValue(e)
// [3]
}
fun main() {
val grid = Grid()
grid.play('X', 1, 1) eq "Successful move"
grid.play('X', 1, 1) eq "Invalid move"
grid.play('O', 1, 3) eq "Invalid move"
}

The Grid class holds a List containing three Lists, each containing three
Cells—a matrix.
[1] The entry property in Cell is a var so it can be modified. The
single quotes in the initialization produce a Char type, so all
assignments to entry must also be Chars.
[2] setValue() tests that the Cell is available and that you’ve passed
the correct character. It returns a String result to indicate success or
failure.
[3] play() checks to see if the x and y arguments are within range,
then indexes into the matrix, relying on the tests performed by
setValue().

Constructors
Constructors create new objects. You pass information to a constructor
using its parameter list, placed in parentheses directly after the class name.
A constructor call thus looks like a function call, except that the initial letter
of the name is capitalized (following the Kotlin style guide). The
constructor returns an object of the class:
// Summary2/WildAnimals.kt
package summary2
import atomictest.eq
class Badger(id: String, years: Int) {
val name = id
val age = years
override fun toString(): String {
return "Badger: $name, age: $age"
}
}
class Snake(
var type: String,
var length: Double
) {
override fun toString(): String {
return "Snake: $type, length: $length"
}
}
class Moose(
val age: Int,
val height: Double
) {
override fun toString(): String {
return "Moose, age: $age, height: $height"
}

}
fun main() {
Badger("Bob", 11) eq "Badger: Bob, age: 11"
Snake("Garden", 2.4) eq
"Snake: Garden, length: 2.4"
Moose(16, 7.2) eq
"Moose, age: 16, height: 7.2"
}

The parameters id and years in Badger are only available in the
constructor body. The constructor body consists of the lines of code other
than function definitions; in this case, the definitions for name and age.
Often you want the constructor parameters to be available in parts of the
class other than the constructor body, but without the trouble of explicitly
defining new identifiers as we did with name and age. If you define your
parameters as vars or vals, they becomes properties and are accessible
everywhere in the class. Both Snake and Moose use this approach, and you
can see that the constructor parameters are now available inside their
respective toString() functions.
Constructor parameters declared with val cannot be changed, but those
declared with var can.
Whenever you use an object in a situation that expects a String, Kotlin
produces a String representation of that object by calling its toString()
member function. To define a toString(), you must understand a new
keyword: override. This is necessary (Kotlin insists on it) because
toString() is already defined. override tells Kotlin that we do actually
want to replace the default toString() with our own definition. The
explicitness of override makes this clear to the reader and helps prevent
mistakes.
Notice the formatting of the multiline parameter list for Snake and Moose—
this is the recommended standard when you have too many parameters to fit
on one line, for both constructors and functions.

Constraining Visibility
Kotlin provides access modifiers similar to those available in other
languages like C++ or Java. These allow component creators to decide what

is available to the client programmer. Kotlin’s access modifiers include the
public, private, protected, and internal keywords. protected is
explained later.
An access modifier like public or private appears before the definition for
a class, function or property. Each access modifier only controls the access
for that particular definition.
A public definition is available to everyone, in particular to the client
programmer who uses that component. Thus, any changes to a public
definition will impact client code.
If you don’t provide a modifier, your definition is automatically public. For
clarity in certain cases, programmers still sometimes redundantly specify
public.
If you define a class, top-level function, or property as private, it is
available only within that file:
// Summary2/Boxes.kt
package summary2
import atomictest.*
private var count = 0

// [1]

private class Box(val dimension: Int) { // [2]
fun volume() =
dimension * dimension * dimension
override fun toString() =
"Box volume: ${volume()}"
}
private fun countBox(box: Box) {
trace("$box")
count++
}
fun countBoxes() {
countBox(Box(4))
countBox(Box(5))
}
fun main() {
countBoxes()
trace("$count boxes")
trace eq """
Box volume: 64
Box volume: 125
2 boxes

// [3]

}

"""

You can access private properties ([1]), classes ([2]), and functions ([3])
only from other functions and classes in the Boxes.kt file. Kotlin prevents
you from accessing private top-level elements from another file.
Class members can be private:
// Summary2/JetPack.kt
package summary2
import atomictest.eq
class JetPack(
private var fuel: Double
// [1]
) {
private var warning = false
private fun burn() =
// [2]
if (fuel - 1 <= 0) {
fuel = 0.0
warning = true
} else
fuel -= 1
public fun fly() = burn() // [3]
fun check() =
// [4]
if (warning)
// [5]
"Warning"
else
"OK"
}
fun main() {
val jetPack = JetPack(3.0)
while (jetPack.check() != "Warning") {
jetPack.check() eq "OK"
jetPack.fly()
}
jetPack.check() eq "Warning"
}

[1] fuel and warning are both private properties and can’t be used by
non-members of JetPack.
[2] burn() is private, and thus only accessible inside JetPack.
[3] fly() and check() are public and can be used everywhere.
[4] No access modifier means public visibility.
[5] Only members of the same class can access private members.
Because a private definition is not available to everyone, you can
generally change it without concern for the client programmer. As a library
designer, you’ll typically keep everything as private as possible, and

expose only functions and classes you want client programmers to use. To
limit the size and complexity of example listings in this book, we only use
private in special cases.
Any function you’re certain is only a helper function can be made private,
to ensure you don’t accidentally use it elsewhere and thus prohibit yourself
from changing or removing the function.
It can be useful to divide large programs into modules. A module is a
logically independent part of a codebase. An internal definition is
accessible only inside the module where it is defined. The way you divide a
project into modules depends on the build system (such as Gradle or
Maven) and is beyond the scope of this book.
Modules are a higher-level concept, while packages enable finer-grained
structuring.

Exceptions
Consider toDouble(), which converts a String to a Double. What happens
if you call it for a String that doesn’t translate into a Double?
// Summary2/ToDoubleException.kt
fun main() {
// val i = "$1.9".toDouble()
}

Uncommenting the line in main() produces an exception. Here, the failing
line is commented so we don’t stop the book’s build (which checks whether
each example compiles and runs as expected).
When an exception is thrown, the current path of execution stops, and the
exception object ejects from the current context. When an exception isn’t
caught, the program aborts and displays a stack trace containing detailed
information.
To avoid displaying exceptions by commenting and uncommenting code,
atomictest.capture() stores the exception and compares it to what we
expect:

// Summary2/AtomicTestCapture.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
capture {
"$1.9".toDouble()
} eq "NumberFormatException: " +
"""For input string: "$1.9""""
}

capture() is designed specifically for this book, so you can see the

exception and know that the output has been checked by the book’s build
system.
Another strategy when your function can’t successfully produce the
expected result is to return null. Later in Nullable Types we discuss how
null affects the type of the resulting expression.
To throw an exception, use the throw keyword followed by the exception
you want to throw, along with any arguments it might need.
quadraticZeroes() in the following example solves the quadratic equation
that defines a parabola:
ax2 + bx + c = 0
The solution is the quadratic formula:

The Quadratic Formula

The example finds the zeroes of the parabola, where the lines cross the xaxis. We throw exceptions for two limitations:
1. a cannot be zero.
2. For zeroes to exist, b2 - 4ac cannot be negative.
If zeroes exist, there are two of them, so we create the Roots class to hold
the return values:

// Summary2/Quadratic.kt
package summary2
import kotlin.math.sqrt
import atomictest.*
class Roots(
val root1: Double,
val root2: Double
)
fun quadraticZeroes(
a: Double,
b: Double,
c: Double
): Roots {
if (a == 0.0)
throw IllegalArgumentException(
"a is zero")
val underRadical = b * b - 4 * a * c
if (underRadical < 0)
throw IllegalArgumentException(
"Negative underRadical: $underRadical")
val squareRoot = sqrt(underRadical)
val root1 = (-b - squareRoot) / 2 * a
val root2 = (-b + squareRoot) / 2 * a
return Roots(root1, root2)
}
fun main() {
capture {
quadraticZeroes(0.0, 4.0, 5.0)
} eq "IllegalArgumentException: " +
"a is zero"
capture {
quadraticZeroes(3.0, 4.0, 5.0)
} eq "IllegalArgumentException: " +
"Negative underRadical: -44.0"
val roots = quadraticZeroes(3.0, 8.0, 5.0)
roots.root1 eq -15.0
roots.root2 eq -9.0
}

Here we use the standard exception class IllegalArgumentException.
Later you’ll learn to define your own exception types and to make them
specific to your circumstances. Your goal is to generate the most useful
messages possible, to simplify the support of your application in the future.

Lists
Lists are Kotlin’s basic sequential container type. You create a read-only
list using listOf() and a mutable list using mutableListOf():
// Summary2/ReadonlyVsMutableList.kt
import atomictest.*

fun main() {
val ints = listOf(5, 13, 9)
// ints.add(11) // 'add()' not available
for (i in ints) {
if (i > 10) {
trace(i)
}
}
val chars = mutableListOf('a', 'b', 'c')
chars.add('d') // 'add()' available
chars += 'e'
trace(chars)
trace eq """
13
[a, b, c, d, e]
"""
}

A basic List is read-only, and does not include modification functions.
Thus, the modification function add() doesn’t work with ints.
for loops work well with Lists: for(i in ints) means i gets each value
in ints.
chars is created as a MutableList; it can be modified using functions like
add() or remove(). You can also use += and -= to add or remove elements.

A read-only List is not the same as an immutable List, which can’t be
modified at all. Here, we assign first, a mutable List, to second, a readonly List reference. The read-only characteristic of second doesn’t prevent
the List from changing via first:
// Summary2/MultipleListReferences.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val first = mutableListOf(1)
val second: List<Int> = first
second eq listOf(1)
first += 2
// second sees the change:
second eq listOf(1, 2)
}

first and second refer to the same object in memory. We mutate the List
via the first reference, and then observe this change in the second

reference.

Here’s a List of Strings created by breaking up a triple-quoted paragraph.
This shows the power of some of the standard library functions. Notice how
those functions can be chained:
// Summary2/ListOfStrings.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
val wocky = """
Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe:
All mimsy were the borogoves,
And the mome raths outgrabe.
""".trim().split(Regex("\\W+"))
trace(wocky.take(5))
trace(wocky.slice(6..12))
trace(wocky.slice(6..18 step 2))
trace(wocky.sorted().takeLast(5))
trace(wocky.sorted().distinct().takeLast(5))
trace eq """
[Twas, brillig, and, the, slithy]
[Did, gyre, and, gimble, in, the, wabe]
[Did, and, in, wabe, mimsy, the, And]
[the, the, toves, wabe, were]
[slithy, the, toves, wabe, were]
"""
}

trim() produces a new String with the leading and trailing whitespace
characters (including newlines) removed. split() divides the String
according to its argument. In this case we use a Regex object, which creates
a regular expression—a pattern that matches the parts to split. \W is a
special pattern that means “not a word character,” and + means “one or
more of the preceeding.” Thus split() will break at one or more non-word

characters, and so divides the block of text into its component words.

In a String literal, \ precedes a special character and produces, for
example, a newline character (\n), or a tab (\t). To produce an actual \ in
the resulting String you need two backslashes: "\\". Thus all regular
expressions require an extra \ to insert a backslash, unless you use a triplequoted String: """\W+""".
take(n) produces a new List containing the first n elements. slice()
produces a new List containing the elements selected by its Range
argument, and this Range can include a step.

Note the name sorted() instead of sort(). When you call sorted() it
produces a sorted List, leaving the original List alone. sort() only works
with a MutableList, and that list is sorted in place—the original List is
modified.
As the name implies, takeLast(n) produces a new List of the last n
elements. You can see from the output that “the” is duplicated. This is
eliminated by adding the distinct() function to the call chain.

Parameterized Types
Type parameters allow us to describe compound types, most commonly
containers. In particular, type parameters specify what a container holds.
Here, we tell Kotlin that numbers contain a List of Int, while strings
contain a List of String:
// Summary2/ExplicitTyping.kt
package summary2
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val numbers: List<Int> = listOf(1, 2, 3)
val strings: List<String> =
listOf("one", "two", "three")
numbers eq "[1, 2, 3]"
strings eq "[one, two, three]"
toCharList("seven") eq "[s, e, v, e, n]"
}
fun toCharList(s: String): List<Char> =
s.toList()

For both the numbers and strings definitions, we add colons and the type
declarations List<Int> and List<String>. The angle brackets denote a
type parameter, allowing us to say, “the container holds ‘parameter’
objects.” You typically pronounce List<Int> as “List of Int.”
A return value can also have a type parameter, as seen in toCharList().
You can’t just say it returns a List—Kotlin complains, so you must give the
type parameter as well.

Variable Argument Lists

The vararg keyword is short for variable argument list, and allows a
function to accept any number of arguments (including zero) of the
specified type. The vararg becomes an Array, which is similar to a List:
// Summary2/VarArgs.kt
package summary2
import atomictest.*
fun varargs(s: String, vararg ints: Int) {
for (i in ints) {
trace("$i")
}
trace(s)
}
fun main() {
varargs("primes", 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23)
trace eq "5 7 11 13 17 19 23 primes"
}

A function definition may specify only one parameter as vararg. Any
parameter in the list can be the vararg, but the final one is generally
simplest.
You can pass an Array of elements wherever a vararg is accepted. To
create an Array, use arrayOf() in the same way you use listOf(). Note
that an Array is always mutable. To convert an Array into a sequence of
arguments (not just a single element of type Array), use the spread operator
*:
// Summary2/ArraySpread.kt
import summary2.varargs
import atomictest.trace
fun main() {
val array = intArrayOf(4, 5)
// [1]
varargs("x", 1, 2, 3, *array, 6) // [2]
val list = listOf(9, 10, 11)
varargs(
"y", 7, 8, *list.toIntArray()) // [3]
trace eq "1 2 3 4 5 6 x 7 8 9 10 11 y"
}

If you pass an Array of primitive types as in the example above, the Array
creation function must be specifically typed. If [1] uses arrayOf(4, 5)
instead of intArrayOf(4, 5), [2] produces an error: inferred type is
Array<Int> but IntArray was expected.

The spread operator only works with arrays. If you have a List to pass as a
sequence of arguments, first convert it to an Array and then apply the
spread operator, as in [3]. Because the result is an Array of a primitive type,
we must use the specific conversion function toIntArray().

Sets
Sets are collections that allow only one element of each value. A Set

automatically prevents duplicates.
// Summary2/ColorSet.kt
package summary2
import atomictest.eq
val colors =
"Yellow Green Green Blue"
.split(Regex("""\W+""")).sorted()

// [1]

fun main() {
colors eq
listOf("Blue", "Green", "Green", "Yellow")
val colorSet = colors.toSet()
// [2]
colorSet eq
setOf("Yellow", "Green", "Blue")
(colorSet + colorSet) eq colorSet
// [3]
val mSet = colorSet.toMutableSet()
// [4]
mSet -= "Blue"
mSet += "Red"
// [5]
mSet eq
setOf("Yellow", "Green", "Red")
// Set membership:
("Green" in colorSet) eq true
// [6]
colorSet.contains("Red") eq false
}

[1] The String is split() using a regular expression as described
earlier for ListOfStrings.kt.
[2] When colors is copied into the read-only Set colorSet, one of
the two "Green" Strings is removed, because it is a duplicate.
[3] Here we create and display a new Set using the + operator. Placing
duplicate items into a Set automatically removes those duplicates.
[4] toMutableSet() produces a new MutableSet from a read-only
Set.
[5] For a MutableSet, the operators += and -= add and remove
elements, as they do with MutableLists.
[6] Test for Set membership using in or contains()

The normal mathematical set operations such as union, intersection,
difference, etc., are all available.

Maps
A Map connects keys to values and looks up a value when given a key. You
create a Map by providing key-value pairs to mapOf(). Using to, we separate
each key from its associated value:
// Summary2/ASCIIMap.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val ascii = mapOf(
"A" to 65,
"B" to 66,
"C" to 67,
"I" to 73,
"J" to 74,
"K" to 75
)
ascii eq
"{A=65, B=66, C=67, I=73, J=74, K=75}"
ascii["B"] eq 66
// [1]
ascii.keys eq "[A, B, C, I, J, K]"
ascii.values eq
"[65, 66, 67, 73, 74, 75]"
var kv = ""
for (entry in ascii) {
// [2]
kv += "${entry.key}:${entry.value},"
}
kv eq "A:65,B:66,C:67,I:73,J:74,K:75,"
kv = ""
for ((key, value) in ascii)
// [3]
kv += "$key:$value,"
kv eq "A:65,B:66,C:67,I:73,J:74,K:75,"
val mutable = ascii.toMutableMap() // [4]
mutable.remove("I")
mutable eq
"{A=65, B=66, C=67, J=74, K=75}"
mutable.put("Z", 90)
mutable eq
"{A=65, B=66, C=67, J=74, K=75, Z=90}"
mutable.clear()
mutable["A"] = 100
mutable eq "{A=100}"
}

[1] A key ("B") is used to look up a value with the [] operator. You
can produce all the keys using keys and all the values using values.
Accessing keys produces a Set because all keys in a Map must already
be unique (otherwise you’d have ambiguity during a lookup).
[2] Iterating through a Map produces key-value pairs as map entries.

[3] You can unpack key-value pairs as you iterate.
[4] You can create a MutableMap from a read-only Map using
toMutableMap(). Now we can perform operations that modify
mutable, such as remove(), put(), and clear(). Square brackets can
assign a new key-value pair into mutable. You can also add a pair by
saying map += key to value.

Property Accessors
Accessing the property i appears straightforward:
// Summary2/PropertyReadWrite.kt
package summary2
import atomictest.eq
class Holder(var i: Int)
fun main() {
val holder = Holder(10)
holder.i eq 10 // Read the 'i' property
holder.i = 20 // Write to the 'i' property
}

However, Kotlin calls functions to perform the read and write operations.
The default behavior of those functions is to read and write the data stored
in i. By creating property accessors, you change the actions that occur
during reading and writing.
The accessor used to fetch the value of a property is called a getter. To
create your own getter, define get() immediately after the property
declaration. The accessor used to modify a mutable property is called a
setter. To create your own setter, define set() immediately after the
property declaration. The order of definition of getters and setters is
unimportant, and you can define one without the other.
The property accessors in the following example imitate the default
implementations while displaying additional information so you can see
that the property accessors are indeed called during reads and writes. We
indent the get() and set() functions to visually associate them with the
property, but the actual association happens because they are defined
immediately after that property:

// Summary2/GetterAndSetter.kt
package summary2
import atomictest.*
class GetterAndSetter {
var i: Int = 0
get() {
trace("get()")
return field
}
set(value) {
trace("set($value)")
field = value
}
}
fun main() {
val gs = GetterAndSetter()
gs.i = 2
trace(gs.i)
trace eq """
set(2)
get()
2
"""
}

Inside the getter and setter, the stored value is manipulated indirectly using
the field keyword, which is only accessible within these two functions.
You can also create a property that doesn’t have a field, but simply calls
the getter to produce a result.
If you declare a private property, both accessors become private. You can
make the setter private and the getter public. This means you can read the
property outside the class, but only change its value inside the class.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

SECTION III: USABILITY
Computer languages differ not so much in what they make possible,
but in what they make easy—Larry Wall, inventor of the Perl
language

Extension Functions
Suppose you discover a library that does everything you need …
almost. If it only had one or two additional member functions, it would
solve your problem perfectly.
But it’s not your code—either you don’t have access to the source code or
you don’t control it. You’d have to repeat your modifications every time a
new version came out.
Kotlin’s extension functions effectively add member functions to existing
classes. The type you extend is called the receiver. To define an extension
function, you precede the function name with the receiver type:
fun ReceiverType.extensionFunction() { ... }

This adds two extension functions to the String class:
// ExtensionFunctions/Quoting.kt
package extensionfunctions
import atomictest.eq
fun String.singleQuote() = "'$this'"
fun String.doubleQuote() = "\"$this\""
fun main() {
"Hi".singleQuote() eq "'Hi'"
"Hi".doubleQuote() eq "\"Hi\""
}

You call extension functions as if they were members of the class.
To use extensions from another package, you must import them:
// ExtensionFunctions/Quote.kt
package other
import atomictest.eq
import extensionfunctions.doubleQuote
import extensionfunctions.singleQuote
fun main() {
"Single".singleQuote() eq "'Single'"

}

"Double".doubleQuote() eq "\"Double\""

You can access member functions or other extensions using the this
keyword. this can also be omitted in the same way it can be omitted inside
a class, so you don’t need explicit qualification:
// ExtensionFunctions/StrangeQuote.kt
package extensionfunctions
import atomictest.eq
// Apply two sets of single quotes:
fun String.strangeQuote() =
this.singleQuote().singleQuote() // [1]
fun String.tooManyQuotes() =
doubleQuote().doubleQuote()

// [2]

fun main() {
"Hi".strangeQuote() eq "''Hi''"
"Hi".tooManyQuotes() eq "\"\"Hi\"\""
}

[1] this refers to the String receiver.
[2] We omit the receiver object (this) of the first doubleQuote()
function call.
Creating extensions to your own classes can sometimes produce simpler
code:
// ExtensionFunctions/BookExtensions.kt
package extensionfunctions
import atomictest.eq
class Book(val title: String)
fun Book.categorize(category: String) =
"""title: "$title", category: $category"""
fun main() {
Book("Dracula").categorize("Vampire") eq
"""title: "Dracula", category: Vampire"""
}

Inside categorize(), we access the title property without explicit
qualification.
-

Note that extension functions can only access public elements of the type
being extended. Thus, extensions can only perform the same actions as
regular functions. You can rewrite Book.categorize(String) as
categorize(Book, String). The only reason for using an extension
function is the syntax, but this syntax sugar is powerful. To the calling code,
extensions look the same as member functions, and IDEs show extensions
when listing the functions that you can call for an object.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Named & Default Arguments
You can provide argument names during a function call.
Named arguments improve code readability. This is especially true for long
and complex argument lists—named arguments can be clear enough that the
reader can understand a function call without looking at the documentation.
In this example, all parameters are Int. Named arguments clarify their
meaning:
// NamedAndDefaultArgs/NamedArguments.kt
package color1
import atomictest.eq
fun color(red: Int, green: Int, blue: Int) =
"($red, $green, $blue)"
fun main() {
color(1, 2, 3) eq "(1, 2, 3)"
color(
red = 76,
green = 89,
blue = 0
) eq "(76, 89, 0)"
color(52, 34, blue = 0) eq
"(52, 34, 0)"
}

// [1]
// [2]

// [3]

[1] This doesn’t tell you much. You’ll have to look at the
documentation to know what the arguments mean.
[2] The meaning of every argument is clear.
[3] You aren’t required to name all arguments.
Named arguments allow you to change the order of the colors. Here, we
specify blue first:
// NamedAndDefaultArgs/ArgumentOrder.kt
import color1.color
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
color(blue = 0, red = 99, green = 52) eq

}

"(99, 52, 0)"
color(red = 255, 255, 0) eq
"(255, 255, 0)"

You can mix named and regular (positional) arguments. If you change
argument order, you should use named arguments throughout the call—not
only for readability, but the compiler often needs to be told where the
arguments are.
Named arguments are even more useful when combined with default
arguments, which are default values for arguments, specified in the function
definition:
// NamedAndDefaultArgs/Color2.kt
package color2
import atomictest.eq
fun color(
red: Int = 0,
green: Int = 0,
blue: Int = 0,
) = "($red, $green, $blue)"
fun main() {
color(139) eq "(139, 0, 0)"
color(blue = 139) eq "(0, 0, 139)"
color(255, 165) eq "(255, 165, 0)"
color(red = 128, blue = 128) eq
"(128, 0, 128)"
}

Any argument you don’t provide gets its default value, so you only need to
provide arguments that differ from the defaults. If you have a long argument
list, this simplifies the resulting code, making it easier to write and—more
importantly—to read.
This example also uses a trailing comma in the definition for color(). The
trailing comma is the extra comma after the last parameter (blue). This is
useful when your parameters or values are written on multiple lines. With a
trailing comma, you can add new items and change their order without
adding or removing commas.
Named and default arguments (as well as trailing commas) also work for
constructors:

// NamedAndDefaultArgs/Color3.kt
package color3
import atomictest.eq
class Color(
val red: Int = 0,
val green: Int = 0,
val blue: Int = 0,
) {
override fun toString() =
"($red, $green, $blue)"
}
fun main() {
Color(red = 77).toString() eq "(77, 0, 0)"
}

joinToString() is a standard library function that uses default arguments.
It combines the contents of an iterable (a list, set or range) into a String.

You can specify a separator, a prefix element and a postfix element:
// NamedAndDefaultArgs/CreateString.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3,)
list.toString() eq "[1, 2, 3]"
list.joinToString() eq "1, 2, 3"
list.joinToString(prefix = "(",
postfix = ")") eq "(1, 2, 3)"
list.joinToString(separator = ":") eq
"1:2:3"
}

The default toString() for a List returns the contents in square brackets,
which might not be what you want. The default values for
joinToString()s parameters are a comma for separator and empty
Strings for prefix and postfix. In the above example, we use named and
default arguments to specify only the arguments we want to change.
The initializer for list includes a trailing comma. Normally you’ll only use
a trailing comma when each element is on its own line.
If you use an object as a default argument, a new instance of that object is
created for each invocation:
// NamedAndDefaultArgs/Evaluation.kt
package namedanddefault
class DefaultArg

fun h(d: DefaultArg = DefaultArg()) =
println(d)
fun main() {
h()
h()
}
/* Sample output:
DefaultArg@28d93b30
DefaultArg@1b6d3586
*/

The addresses of the Default objects are different for the two calls to h(),
showing that there are two distinct objects.
Specify argument names when they improve readability. Compare the
following two calls to joinToString():
// NamedAndDefaultArgs/CreateString2.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3)
list.joinToString(". ", "", "!") eq
"1. 2. 3!"
list.joinToString(separator = ". ",
postfix = "!") eq "1. 2. 3!"
}

It’s hard to guess whether ". " or "" is a separator unless you memorize the
parameter order, which is impractical.
As another example of default arguments, trimMargin() is a standard
library function that formats multi-line Strings. It uses a margin prefix
String to establish the beginning of each line. trimMargin() trims leading
whitespace characters followed by the margin prefix from every line of the
source String. It removes the first and last lines if they are blank:
// NamedAndDefaultArgs/TrimMargin.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val poem = """
|->Last night I saw upon the stair
|->A little man who wasn't there
|->He wasn't there again today
|->Oh, how I wish he'd go away."""
poem.trimMargin() eq
"""->Last night I saw upon the stair
->A little man who wasn't there
->He wasn't there again today

->Oh, how I wish he'd go away."""
poem.trimMargin(marginPrefix = "|->") eq
"""Last night I saw upon the stair
A little man who wasn't there
He wasn't there again today
Oh, how I wish he'd go away."""
}

The | (“pipe”) is the default argument for the margin prefix, and you can
replace it with a String of your choosing.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Overloading
Languages without support for default arguments often use
overloading to imitate that feature.
The term overload refers to the name of a function: You use the same name
(“overload” that name) for different functions as long as the parameter lists
differ. Here, we overload the member function f():
// Overloading/Overloading.kt
package overloading
import atomictest.eq
class Overloading {
fun f() = 0
fun f(n: Int) = n + 2
}
fun main() {
val o = Overloading()
o.f() eq 0
o.f(11) eq 13
}

In Overloading, you see two functions with the same name, f(). The
function’s signature consists of the name, parameter list and return type.
Kotlin distinguishes one function from another by comparing signatures.
When overloading functions, the parameter lists must be unique—you
cannot overload on return types.
The calls show that they are indeed different functions. A function signature
also includes information about the enclosing class (or the receiver type, if
it’s an extension function).
Note that if a class already has a member function with the same signature
as an extension function, Kotlin prefers the member function. However, you
can overload the member function with an extension function:
// Overloading/MemberVsExtension.kt
package overloading
import atomictest.eq

class My {
fun foo() = 0
}
fun My.foo() = 1

// [1]

fun My.foo(i: Int) = i + 2

// [2]

fun main() {
My().foo() eq 0
My().foo(1) eq 3
}

[1] It’s senseless to declare an extension that duplicates a member,
because it can never be called.
[2] You can overload a member function using an extension function
by providing a different parameter list.
Don’t use overloading to imitate default arguments. That is, don’t do this:
// Overloading/WithoutDefaultArguments.kt
package withoutdefaultarguments
import atomictest.eq
fun f(n: Int) = n + 373
fun f() = f(0)
fun main() {
f() eq 373
}

The function without parameters just calls the first function. The two
functions can be replaced with a single function by using a default
argument:
// Overloading/WithDefaultArguments.kt
package withdefaultarguments
import atomictest.eq
fun f(n: Int = 0) = n + 373
fun main() {
f() eq 373
}

In both examples you can call the function either without an argument or by
passing an integer value. Prefer the form in WithDefaultArguments.kt.

When using overloaded functions together with default arguments, calling
the overloaded function searches for the “closest” match. In the following
example, the foo() call in main() does not call the first version of the
function using its default argument of 99, but instead calls the second
version, the one without parameters:
// Overloading/OverloadedVsDefaultArg.kt
package overloadingvsdefaultargs
import atomictest.*
fun foo(n: Int = 99) = trace("foo-1-$n")
fun foo() {
trace("foo-2")
foo(14)
}
fun main() {
foo()
trace eq """
foo-2
foo-1-14
"""
}

You can never utilize the default argument of 99, because foo() always
calls the second version of f().
Why is overloading useful? It allows you to express “variations on a theme”
more clearly than if you were forced to use different function names.
Suppose you want addition functions:
// Overloading/OverloadingAdd.kt
package overloading
import atomictest.eq
fun addInt(i: Int, j: Int) = i + j
fun addDouble(i: Double, j: Double) = i + j
fun add(i: Int, j: Int) = i + j
fun add(i: Double, j: Double) = i + j
fun main() {
addInt(5, 6) eq add(5, 6)
addDouble(56.23, 44.77) eq
add(56.23, 44.77)
}

addInt() takes two Ints and returns an Int, while addDouble() takes two
Doubles and returns a Double. Without overloading, you can’t just name the

operation add(), so programmers typically conflate what with how to
produce unique names (you can also create unique names using random
characters but the typical pattern is to use meaningful information like
parameter types). In contrast, the overloaded add() is much clearer.
The lack of overloading in a language is not a terrible hardship, but the
feature provides valuable simplification, producing more readable code.
With overloading, you just say what, which raises the level of abstraction
and puts less mental load on the reader. If you want to know how, look at
the parameters. Notice also that overloading reduces redundancy: If we
must say addInt() and addDouble(), then we essentially repeat the
parameter information in the function name.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

when Expressions
A large part of computer programming is performing an action when a
pattern matches.
Anything that simplifies this task is a boon for programmers. If you have
more than two or three choices to make, when expressions are much nicer
than if expressions.
A when expression compares a value against a selection of possibilities. It
begins with the keyword when and the parenthesized value to compare. This
is followed by a body containing a set of possible matches and their
associated actions. Each match is an expression followed by a right arrow >. The arrow is the two separate characters - and > with no white space
between them. The expression is evaluated and compared to the target
value. If it matches, the expression to the right of the -> produces the result
of the when expression.
ordinal() in the following example builds the German word for an ordinal

number based on a word for the cardinal number. It matches an integer to a
fixed set of numbers to check whether it applies to a general rule or is an
exception (which happens painfully often in German):
// WhenExpressions/GermanOrdinals.kt
package whenexpressions
import atomictest.eq
val numbers = mapOf(
1 to "eins", 2 to "zwei", 3 to "drei",
4 to "vier", 5 to "fuenf", 6 to "sechs",
7 to "sieben", 8 to "acht", 9 to "neun",
10 to "zehn", 11 to "elf", 12 to "zwoelf",
13 to "dreizehn", 14 to "vierzehn",
15 to "fuenfzehn", 16 to "sechzehn",
17 to "siebzehn", 18 to "achtzehn",
19 to "neunzehn", 20 to "zwanzig"
)
fun ordinal(i: Int): String =
when (i) {
1 -> "erste"

// [1]
// [2]

}

3 -> "dritte"
7 -> "siebte"
8 -> "achte"
20 -> "zwanzigste"
else -> numbers.getValue(i) + "te"

// [3]

fun main() {
ordinal(2) eq "zweite"
ordinal(3) eq "dritte"
ordinal(11) eq "elfte"
}

[1] The when expression compares i to the match expressions in the
body.
[2] The first successful match completes execution of the when
expression—here, a String is produced which becomes the return
value of ordinal().
[3] The else keyword provides a “fall through” when there are no
matches. The else case always appears last in the match list. When we
test against 2, it doesn’t match 1, 3, 7, 8 or 20, and so falls through to
the else case.
If you forget the else branch in the example above, the compile-time error
is: ‘when’ expression must be exhaustive, add necessary ‘else’ branch. If
you treat a when expression as a statement—that is, you don’t use the result
of the when—you can omit the else branch. Unmatched values are then just
ignored.
In the following example, Coordinates reports changes to its properties
using Property Accessors. The when expression processes each item from
inputs:
// WhenExpressions/AnalyzeInput.kt
package whenexpressions
import atomictest.*
class Coordinates {
var x: Int = 0
set(value) {
trace("x gets $value")
field = value
}
var y: Int = 0
set(value) {
trace("y gets $value")
field = value
}

}

override fun toString() = "($x, $y)"

fun processInputs(inputs: List<String>) {
val coordinates = Coordinates()
for (input in inputs) {
when (input) {
// [1]
"up", "u" -> coordinates.y-// [2]
"down", "d" -> coordinates.y++
"left", "l" -> coordinates.x-"right", "r" -> {
// [3]
trace("Moving right")
coordinates.x++
}
"nowhere" -> {}
// [4]
"exit" -> return
// [5]
else -> trace("bad input: $input")
}
}
}
fun main() {
processInputs(listOf("up", "d", "nowhere",
"left", "right", "exit", "r"))
trace eq """
y gets -1
y gets 0
x gets -1
Moving right
x gets 0
"""
}

[1] input is matched against the different options.
[2] You can list several values in one branch using commas. Here, if
the user enters either “up” or “u” we interpret it as a move up.
[3] Multiple actions within a branch must be in a block body.
[4] “Doing nothing” is expressed with an empty block.
[5] Returning from the outer function is a valid action within a branch.
In this case, the return terminates the call to processInputs().
Any expression can be an argument for when, and the matches can be any
values (not just constants):
// WhenExpressions/MatchingAgainstVals.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
val yes = "A"
val no = "B"
for (choice in listOf(yes, no, yes)) {
when (choice) {
yes -> trace("Hooray!")
no -> trace("Too bad!")

}
// The same logic using 'if':
if (choice == yes) trace("Hooray!")
else if (choice == no) trace("Too bad!")

}

}
trace eq """
Hooray!
Hooray!
Too bad!
Too bad!
Hooray!
Hooray!
"""

when expressions can overlap the functionality of if expressions. when is
more flexible, so prefer it over if when there’s a choice.

We can match a Set of values against another Set of values:
// WhenExpressions/MixColors.kt
package whenexpressions
import atomictest.eq
fun mixColors(first: String, second: String) =
when (setOf(first, second)) {
setOf("red", "blue") -> "purple"
setOf("red", "yellow") -> "orange"
setOf("blue", "yellow") -> "green"
else -> "unknown"
}
fun main() {
mixColors("red", "blue") eq "purple"
mixColors("blue", "red") eq "purple"
mixColors("blue", "purple") eq "unknown"
}

Inside mixColors() we use a Set as a when argument and compare it with
different Sets. We use a Set because the order of elements is unimportant—
we need the same result when we mix “red” and “blue” as when we mix
“blue” and “red.”
when has a special form that takes no argument. Omitting the argument
means the branches can check different Boolean conditions. You can use

any Boolean expression as a branch condition. As an example, we rewrite
bmiMetric() introduced in Number Types, first showing the original
solution, then using when instead of if:

// WhenExpressions/BmiWhen.kt
package whenexpressions

import atomictest.eq
fun bmiMetricOld(
kg: Double,
heightM: Double
): String {
val bmi = kg / (heightM * heightM)
return if (bmi < 18.5) "Underweight"
else if (bmi < 25) "Normal weight"
else "Overweight"
}
fun bmiMetricWithWhen(
kg: Double,
heightM: Double
): String {
val bmi = kg / (heightM * heightM)
return when {
bmi < 18.5 -> "Underweight"
bmi < 25 -> "Normal weight"
else -> "Overweight"
}
}
fun main() {
bmiMetricOld(72.57, 1.727) eq
bmiMetricWithWhen(72.57, 1.727)
}

The solution using when is a more elegant way to choose between several
options.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Enumerations
An enumeration is a collection of names.
Kotlin’s enum class is a convenient way to manage these names:
// Enumerations/Level.kt
package enumerations
import atomictest.eq
enum class Level {
Overflow, High, Medium, Low, Empty
}
fun main() {
Level.Medium eq "Medium"
}

Creating an enum generates toString()s for the enum names.
You must qualify each reference to an enumeration name, as with
Level.Medium in main(). You can eliminate this qualification using an
import to bring all names from the enumeration into the current namespace
(namespaces keep names from colliding with each other):
// Enumerations/EnumImport.kt
import atomictest.eq
import enumerations.Level.*
// [1]
fun main() {
Overflow eq "Overflow"
High eq "High"
}

[1] The * imports all the names inside the Level enumeration, but does
not import the name Level.
You can import enum values into the same file where the enum class is
defined:
// Enumerations/RecursiveEnumImport.kt
package enumerations
import atomictest.eq

import enumerations.Size.*

// [1]

enum class Size {
Tiny, Small, Medium, Large, Huge, Gigantic
}
fun main() {
Gigantic eq "Gigantic"
Size.values().toList() eq
listOf(Tiny, Small, Medium,
Large, Huge, Gigantic)
Tiny.ordinal eq 0
Huge.ordinal eq 4
}

// [2]
// [3]
// [4]

[1] We import the values of Size before the Size definition appears in
the file.
[2] After the import, we no longer need to qualify access to the
enumeration names.
[3] You can iterate through the enumeration names using values().
values() returns an Array, so we call toList() to convert it to a List.
[4] The first declared constant of an enum has an ordinal value of
zero. Each subsequent constant receives the next integer value.
You can perform different actions for different enum entries using a when
expression. Here we import the name Level, as well as all its entries:
// Enumerations/CheckingOptions.kt
package checkingoptions
import atomictest.*
import enumerations.Level
import enumerations.Level.*
fun checkLevel(level: Level) {
when (level) {
Overflow -> trace(">>> Overflow!")
Empty -> trace("Alert: Empty")
else -> trace("Level $level OK")
}
}
fun main() {
checkLevel(Empty)
checkLevel(Low)
checkLevel(Overflow)
trace eq """
Alert: Empty
Level Low OK
>>> Overflow!
"""
}

checkLevel() performs specific actions for only two of the constants, while
behaving ordinarily (the else case) for all other options.

An enumeration is a special kind of class with a fixed number of instances,
all listed within the class body. In other ways, an enum class behaves like a
regular class, so you can define member properties and functions. If you
include additional elements, you must add a semicolon after the last
enumeration value:
// Enumerations/Direction.kt
package enumerations
import atomictest.eq
import enumerations.Direction.*
enum class Direction(val notation: String) {
North("N"), South("S"),
East("E"), West("W"); // Semicolon required
val opposite: Direction
get() = when (this) {
North -> South
South -> North
West -> East
East -> West
}
}
fun main() {
North.notation eq "N"
North.opposite eq South
West.opposite.opposite eq West
North.opposite.notation eq "S"
}

The Direction class contains a notation property holding a different value
for each instance. You pass values for the notation constructor parameter
in parentheses (North("N")), just like you construct an instance of a regular
class.
The getter for the opposite property dynamically computes the result when
it is accessed.
Notice that when doesn’t require an else branch in this example, because all
possible enum entries are covered.
-

Enumerations can make your code more readable, which is always
desirable.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Data Classes
Kotlin reduces repetitive coding.
The class mechanism performs a fair amount of work for you. However,
creating classes that primarily hold data still requires a significant amount
of repetitive code. When you need a class that’s essentially a data holder,
data classes simplify your code and perform common tasks.
You define a data class using the data keyword, which tells Kotlin to
generate additional functionality. Each constructor parameter must be
preceded by var or val:
// DataClasses/Simple.kt
package dataclasses
import atomictest.eq
data class Simple(
val arg1: String,
var arg2: Int
)
fun main() {
val s1 = Simple("Hi", 29)
val s2 = Simple("Hi", 29)
s1 eq "Simple(arg1=Hi, arg2=29)"
s1 eq s2
}

This example reveals two features of data classes:
1. The String produced by s1 is different than what we usually see; it
includes the parameter names and values of the data held by the object.
data classes display objects in a nice, readable format without
requiring any additional code.
2. If you create two instances of the same data class containing identical
data (equal values for properties), you probably also want those two
instances to be equal. To achieve that behavior for a regular class, you
must define a special function equals() to compare instances. In data

classes, this function is automatically generated; it compares the values
of all properties specified as constructor parameters.
Here’s an ordinary class Person and a data class Contact:
// DataClasses/DataClasses.kt
package dataclasses
import atomictest.*
class Person(val name: String)
data class Contact(
val name: String,
val number: String
)
fun main() {
// These seem the same, but they're not:
Person("Cleo") neq Person("Cleo")
// A data class defines equality sensibly:
Contact("Miffy", "1-234-567890") eq
Contact("Miffy", "1-234-567890")
}
/* Sample output:
dataclasses.Person@54bedef2
Contact(name=Miffy, number=1-234-567890)
*/

Because the Person class is defined without the data keyword, two
instances containing the same name are not equal. Fortunately, creating
Contact as a data class produces a reasonable result.
Notice the difference between the display format of the data class, and
Person, which just shows default object information.
Another useful function generated for every data class is copy(), which
creates a new object containing the data from the current object. However,
it also allows you to change selected values in the process:
// DataClasses/CopyDataClass.kt
package dataclasses
import atomictest.eq
data class DetailedContact(
val name: String,
val surname: String,
val number: String,
val address: String
)
fun main() {

}

val contact = DetailedContact(
"Miffy",
"Miller",
"1-234-567890",
"1600 Amphitheatre Parkway")
val newContact = contact.copy(
number = "098-765-4321",
address = "Brandschenkestrasse 110")
newContact eq DetailedContact(
"Miffy",
"Miller",
"098-765-4321",
"Brandschenkestrasse 110")

The parameter names for copy() are identical to the constructor parameters.
All arguments have default values that are equal to the current values, so
you provide only the ones you want to replace.
HashMap and HashSet

Creating a data class also generates an appropriate hash function so that
objects can be used as keys in HashMaps and HashSets:
// DataClasses/HashCode.kt
package dataclasses
import atomictest.eq
data class Key(val name: String, val id: Int)
fun main() {
val korvo: Key = Key("Korvo", 19)
korvo.hashCode() eq -2041757108
val map = HashMap<Key, String>()
map[korvo] = "Alien"
map[korvo] eq "Alien"
val set = HashSet<Key>()
set.add(korvo)
set.contains(korvo) eq true
}

hashCode() is used in conjunction with equals() to rapidly look up a Key
in a HashMap or a HashSet. Creating a correct hashCode() by hand is tricky
and error-prone, so it is quite beneficial to have the data class do it for you.
Operator Overloading covers equals() and hashCode() in more detail.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Destructuring Declarations
Suppose you want to return more than one item from a function, such
as a result along with some information about that result.
The Pair class, which is part of the standard library, allows you to return
two values:
// Destructuring/Pairs.kt
package destructuring
import atomictest.eq
fun compute(input: Int): Pair<Int, String> =
if (input > 5)
Pair(input * 2, "High")
else
Pair(input * 2, "Low")
fun main() {
compute(7) eq Pair(14, "High")
compute(4) eq Pair(8, "Low")
val result = compute(5)
result.first eq 10
result.second eq "Low"
}

We specify the return type of compute() as Pair<Int, String>. A Pair is
a parameterized type, like List or Set.
Returning multiple values is helpful, but we’d also like a convenient way to
unpack the results. As shown above, you can access the components of a
Pair using its first and second properties, but you can also declare and
initialize several identifiers simultaneously using a destructuring
declaration:
val (a, b, c) = composedValue

This destructures a composed value and positionally assigns its
components. The syntax differs from defining a single identifier—for
destructuring, you put the names of the identifiers inside parentheses.

Here’s a destructuring declaration for the Pair returned from compute():
// Destructuring/PairDestructuring.kt
import destructuring.compute
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val (value, description) = compute(7)
value eq 14
description eq "High"
}

The Triple class combines three values, but that’s as far as it goes. This is
intentional: if you need to store more values, or if you find yourself using
many Pairs or Triples, consider creating special classes instead.
data Classes automatically allow destructuring declarations:
// Destructuring/Computation.kt
package destructuring
import atomictest.eq
data class Computation(
val data: Int,
val info: String
)
fun evaluate(input: Int) =
if (input > 5)
Computation(input * 2, "High")
else
Computation(input * 2, "Low")
fun main() {
val (value, description) = evaluate(7)
value eq 14
description eq "High"
}

It’s clearer to return a Computation instead of a Pair<Int, String>.
Choosing a good name for the result is almost as important as choosing a
good self-explanatory name for the function itself. Adding or removing
Computation information is simpler if it’s a separate class rather than a
Pair.
When you unpack an instance of a data class, you must assign values to the
new identifiers in the same order you define the properties in the class:
// Destructuring/Tuple.kt
package destructuring

import atomictest.eq
data class Tuple(
val i: Int,
val d: Double,
val s: String,
val b: Boolean,
val l: List<Int>
)
fun main() {
val tuple = Tuple(
1, 3.14, "Mouse", false, listOf())
val (i, d, s, b, l) = tuple
i eq 1
d eq 3.14
s eq "Mouse"
b eq false
l eq listOf()

}

val (_, _, animal) = tuple
animal eq "Mouse"

// [1]

[1] If you don’t need some of the identifiers, you may use underscores
instead of their names, or omit them completely if they appear at the
end. Here, the unpacked values 1 and 3.14 are discarded using
underscores, "Mouse" is captured into animal, and false and the
empty List are discarded because they are at the end of the list.
The properties of a data class are assigned by order, not by name. If you
destructure an object and later add a property anywhere except the end of its
data class, that new property will be destructured on top of your previous
identifier, producing unexpected results (see Exercise 3). If your custom
data class has properties with identical types, the compiler can’t detect
misuse so you may want to avoid destructuring it. Destructuring library
data classes like Pair or Triple is safe, because they don’t change.
Using a for loop, you can iterate over a Map or a List of pairs (or other
data classes) and destructure each element:
// Destructuring/ForLoop.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
var result = ""
val map = mapOf(1 to "one", 2 to "two")
for ((key, value) in map) {
result += "$key = $value, "
}

result eq "1 = one, 2 = two,"

}

result = ""
val listOfPairs =
listOf(Pair(1, "one"), Pair(2, "two"))
for ((i, s) in listOfPairs) {
result += "($i, $s), "
}
result eq "(1, one), (2, two),"

withIndex() is a standard library extension function for List. It returns a
collection of IndexedValues, which can be destructured:
// Destructuring/LoopWithIndex.kt
import atomictest.trace
fun main() {
val list = listOf('a', 'b', 'c')
for ((index, value) in list.withIndex()) {
trace("$index:$value")
}
trace eq "0:a 1:b 2:c"
}

Destructuring declarations are only allowed for local vars and vals, and
cannot be used to create class properties.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Nullable Types
Consider a function that sometimes produces “no result.” When this
happens, the function doesn’t produce an error per se. Nothing went
wrong, there’s just “no answer.”
A good example is retrieving a value from a Map. If the Map doesn’t contain
a value for a given key, it can’t give you an answer and returns a null
reference to indicate “no value”:
// NullableTypes/NullInMaps.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val map = mapOf(0 to "yes", 1 to "no")
map[2] eq null
}

Languages like Java allow a result to be either null or a meaningful value.
Unfortunately, if you treat null the same way you treat a meaningful value,
you get a dramatic failure (In Java, this produces a NullPointerException;
in a more primitive language like C, a null pointer can crash the process or
even the operating system or machine). The creator of the null reference,
Tony Hoare, refers to it as “my billion-dollar mistake” (although it has
arguably cost much more than that).
One possible solution to this problem is for a language to never allow nulls
in the first place, and instead introduce a special “no value” indicator.
Kotlin might have done this, except that it must interact with Java, and Java
uses nulls.
Kotlin’s solution is arguably the best compromise: types default to nonnullable. However, if something can produce a null result, you must
append a question mark to the type name to explicitly tag that result as
nullable:

// NullableTypes/NullableTypes.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val s1 = "abc"

}

// [1]

// Compile-time error:
// val s2: String = null

// [2]

// Nullable definitions:
val s3: String? = null
val s4: String? = s1

// [3]
// [4]

// Compile-time error:
// val s5: String = s4
val s6 = s4

// [5]
// [6]

s1 eq "abc"
s3 eq null
s4 eq "abc"
s6 eq "abc"

[1] s1 can’t contain a null reference. All the vars and vals we’ve
created in the book so far are automatically non-nullable.
[2] The error message is: null can not be a value of a non-null type
String.
[3] To define an identifier that can contain a null reference, you put a
? at the end of the type name. Such an identifier can contain either
null or a regular value.
[4] Both nulls and regular non-nullable values can be stored in a
nullable type.
[5] You can’t assign an identifier of a nullable type to an identifier of a
non-null type. Kotlin emits: Type mismatch: inferred type is String?
but String was expected. Even if the actual value is non-null as in this
case (we know it’s "abc"), Kotlin won’t allow it because they are two
different types.
[6] If you use type inference, Kotlin produces the appropriate type.
Here, s6 is nullable because s4 is nullable.
Even though it looks like we just modify an existing type by adding a ? at
the end, we’re actually specifying a different type. For example, String and
String? are two different types. The String? type forbids the operations in
lines [2] and [5], thus guaranteeing that a value of a non-nullable type is
never null.

Retrieving a value from a Map using square brackets produces a nullable
result, because the underlying Map implementation comes from Java:
// NullableTypes/NullableInMap.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val map = mapOf(0 to "yes", 1 to "no")
val first: String? = map[0]
val second: String? = map[2]
first eq "yes"
second eq null
}

Why is it important to know that a value can’t be null? Many operations
implicitly assume a non-nullable result. For example, calling a member
function will fail with an exception if the receiver value is null. In Java
such a call will fail with a NullPointerException (often abbreviated NPE).
Because almost any value can be null in Java, any function invocation can
fail this way. In these cases you must write code to check for null results,
or rely on other parts of the code to guard against nulls.
In Kotlin you can’t simply dereference (call a member function or access a
member property) a value of a nullable type:
// NullableTypes/Dereference.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val s1: String = "abc"
val s2: String? = s1

}

s1.length eq 3
// Doesn't compile:
// s2.length

// [1]
// [2]

You can access members of a non-nullable type as in [1]. If you reference
members of a nullable type, as in [2], Kotlin emits an error.
Values of most types are stored as references to the objects in memory.
That’s the meaning of the term dereference—to access an object, you
retrieve its value from memory.
The most straightforward way to ensure that dereferencing a nullable type
won’t throw a NullPointerException is to explicitly check that the

reference is not null:
// NullableTypes/ExplicitCheck.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val s: String? = "abc"
if (s != null)
s.length eq 3
}

After the explicit if-check, Kotlin allows you to dereference a nullable. But
writing this if whenever you work with nullable types is too noisy for such
a common operation. Kotlin has concise syntax to alleviate this problem,
which you’ll learn about in subsequent atoms.
Whenever you create a new class, Kotlin automatically includes nullable
and non-nullable types:
// NullableTypes/Amphibian.kt
package nullabletypes
class Amphibian
enum class Species {
Frog, Toad, Salamander, Caecilian
}
fun main() {
val a1: Amphibian = Amphibian()
val a2: Amphibian? = null
val at1: Species = Species.Toad
val at2: Species? = null
}

As you can see, we didn’t do anything special to produce the
complementary nullable types—they’re available by default.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Safe Calls & the Elvis Operator
Kotlin provides convenient operations for handling nullability.
Nullable types come with numerous restrictions. You can’t simply
dereference an identifier of a nullable type:
// SafeCallsAndElvis/DereferenceNull.kt
fun main() {
val s: String? = null
// Doesn't compile:
// s.length
// [1]
}

Uncommenting [1] produces a compile-time error: Only safe (?.) or nonnull asserted (!!.) calls are allowed on a nullable receiver of type String?.
A safe call replaces the dot (.) in a regular call with a question mark and a
dot (?.), without intervening space. Safe calls access members of a nullable
in a way that ensures no exceptions are thrown. They only perform an
operation when the receiver is not null:
// SafeCallsAndElvis/SafeOperation.kt
package safecalls
import atomictest.*
fun String.echo() {
trace(toUpperCase())
trace(this)
trace(toLowerCase())
}
fun main() {
val s1: String? = "Howdy!"
s1?.echo()
val s2: String? = null
s2?.echo()
trace eq """
HOWDY!
Howdy!
howdy!
"""
}

// [1]
// [2]

Line [1] calls echo() and produces results in the trace, while line [2] does
nothing because the receiver s2 is null.
Safe calls are a clean way to capture results:
// SafeCallsAndElvis/SafeCall.kt
package safecalls
import atomictest.eq
fun checkLength(s: String?, expected: Int?) {
val length1 =
if (s != null) s.length else null // [1]
val length2 = s?.length
// [2]
length1 eq expected
length2 eq expected
}
fun main() {
checkLength("abc", 3)
checkLength(null, null)
}

Line [2] achieves the same effect as line [1]. If the receiver is not null it
performs a normal access (s.length). If the receiver is null it doesn’t
perform the s.length call (which would cause an exception), but produces
null for the expression.
What if you need something more than the null produced by ?.? The Elvis
operator provides an alternative. This operator is a question mark followed
by a colon (?:), with no intervening space. It is named for an emoticon of
the musician Elvis Presley, and is also a play on the words “else-if” (which
sounds vaguely like “Elvis”).
A number of programming languages provide a null coalescing operator
that performs the same action as Kotlin’s Elvis operator.
If the expression on the left of ?: is not null, that expression becomes the
result. If the left-hand expression is null, then the expression on the right of
the ?: becomes the result:
// SafeCallsAndElvis/ElvisOperator.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val s1: String? = "abc"
(s1 ?: "---") eq "abc"

}

val s2: String? = null
(s2 ?: "---") eq "---"

s1 is not null, so the Elvis operator produces "abc" as the result. Because
s2 is null, the Elvis operator produces the alternate result of "---".

The Elvis operator is typically used after a safe call, to produce a
meaningful value instead of the default null, as you see in [2]:
// SafeCallsAndElvis/ElvisCall.kt
package safecalls
import atomictest.eq
fun checkLength(s: String?, expected: Int) {
val length1 =
if (s != null) s.length else 0
// [1]
val length2 = s?.length ?: 0
// [2]
length1 eq expected
length2 eq expected
}
fun main() {
checkLength("abc", 3)
checkLength(null, 0)
}

This checkLength() function is quite similar to the one in SafeCall.kt
above. The expected parameter type is now non-nullable. [1] and [2]
produce zero instead of null.
Safe calls allow you to write chained calls concisely, when some elements
in the chain might be null and you’re only interested in the final result:
// SafeCallsAndElvis/ChainedCalls.kt
package safecalls
import atomictest.eq
class Person(
val name: String,
var friend: Person? = null
)
fun main() {
val alice = Person("Alice")
alice.friend?.friend?.name eq null

// [1]

val bob = Person("Bob")
val charlie = Person("Charlie", bob)
bob.friend = charlie
bob.friend?.friend?.name eq "Bob"
// [2]
(alice.friend?.friend?.name

}

?: "Unknown") eq "Unknown"

// [3]

When you chain access to several members using safe calls, the result is
null if any intermediate expressions are null.
[1] The property alice.friend is null, so the rest of the calls return
null.
[2] All intermediate calls produce meaningful values.
[3] An Elvis operator after the chain of safe calls provides an alternate
value if any intermediate element is null.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Non-Null Assertions
A second approach to the problem of nullable types is to have special
knowledge that the reference in question isn’t null.
To make this claim, use the double exclamation point, !!, called the nonnull assertion. If this looks alarming, it should: believing that something
can’t be null is the source of most null-related program failures (the rest
come from not realizing that a null can happen).
x!! means “forget the fact that x might be null—I guarantee that it’s not
null.” x!! produces x if x isn’t null, otherwise it throws an exception:
// NonNullAssertions/NonNullAssert.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
var x: String? = "abc"
x!! eq "abc"
x = null
capture {
val s: String = x!!
} eq "NullPointerException"
}

The definition val s: String = x!! tells Kotlin to ignore what it thinks it
knows about x and just assign it to s, which is a non-nullable reference.
Fortunately, there’s run-time support that throws a NullPointerException
when x is null.
Ordinarily you won’t use the !! by itself, but instead in conjunction with a
. dereference:
// NonNullAssertions/NonNullAssertCall.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val s: String? = "abc"
s!!.length eq 3
}

If you limit yourself to a single non-null asserted call per line, it’s easier to
locate a failure when the exception gives you a line number.
The safe call ?. is a single operator, but a non-null asserted call consists of
two operators: the non-null assertion (!!) and a dereference (.). As you saw
in NonNullAssert.kt, you can use a non-null assertion by itself.
Avoid non-null assertions and prefer safe calls or explicit checks. Non-null
assertions were introduced to enable interaction between Kotlin and Java,
and for the rare cases when Kotlin isn’t smart enough to ensure the
necessary checks are performed.
If you frequently use non-null assertions in your code for the same
operation, it’s better to use a separate function with a specific assertion
describing the problem. As an example, suppose your program logic
requires a particular key to be present in a Map, and you prefer getting an
exception instead of silently doing nothing if the key is absent. Instead of
extracting the value with the usual approach (square brackets), getValue()
throws NoSuchElementException if a key is missing:
// NonNullAssertions/ValueFromMap.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
val map = mapOf(1 to "one")
map[1]!!.toUpperCase() eq "ONE"
map.getValue(1).toUpperCase() eq "ONE"
capture {
map[2]!!.toUpperCase()
} eq "NullPointerException"
capture {
map.getValue(2).toUpperCase()
} eq "NoSuchElementException: " +
"Key 2 is missing in the map."
}

Throwing the specific NoSuchElementException gives you more useful
details when something goes wrong.
Optimal code uses only safe calls and special functions that throw detailed
exceptions. Only use non-null asserted calls when you absolutely must.
Although non-null assertions were included to support interaction with

Java code, there are better ways to interact with Java, which you can learn
about in Appendix B: Java Interoperability.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Extensions for Nullable Types
Sometimes it’s not what it looks like.
s?.f() implies that s is nullable—otherwise you could simply call s.f().
Similarly, t.f() seems to imply that t is non-nullable because Kotlin
doesn’t require a safe call or programmatic check. However, t is not

necessarily non-nullable.

The Kotlin standard library provides String extension functions, including:
isNullOrEmpty(): Tests whether the receiver String is null or empty.
isNullOrBlank(): Performs the same check as isNullOrEmpty() and
allows the receiver String to consist solely of whitespace characters,
including tabs (\t) and newlines (\n).

Here’s a basic test of these functions:
// NullableExtensions/StringIsNullOr.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val s1: String? = null
s1.isNullOrEmpty() eq true
s1.isNullOrBlank() eq true
val s2 = ""
s2.isNullOrEmpty() eq true
s2.isNullOrBlank() eq true

}

val s3: String = " \t\n"
s3.isNullOrEmpty() eq false
s3.isNullOrBlank() eq true

The function names suggest they are for nullable types. However, even
though s1 is nullable, you can call isNullOrEmpty() or isNullOrBlank()
without a safe call or explicit check. That’s because these are extension
functions on the nullable type String?.

We can rewrite isNullOrEmpty() as a non-extension function that takes the
nullable String s as a parameter:
// NullableExtensions/NullableParameter.kt
package nullableextensions
import atomictest.eq
fun isNullOrEmpty(s: String?): Boolean =
s == null || s.isEmpty()
fun main() {
isNullOrEmpty(null) eq true
isNullOrEmpty("") eq true
}

Because s is nullable, we explicitly check for null or empty. The
expression s == null || s.isEmpty() uses short-circuiting: if the first
part of the expression is true, the rest of the expression is not evaluated,
thus preventing a null pointer exception.
Extension functions use this to represent the receiver (the object of the
type being extended). To make the receiver nullable, add ? to the type being
extended:
// NullableExtensions/NullableExtension.kt
package nullableextensions
import atomictest.eq
fun String?.isNullOrEmpty(): Boolean =
this == null || isEmpty()
fun main() {
"".isNullOrEmpty() eq true
}

isNullOrEmpty() is more readable as an extension function.

Take care when using extensions for nullable types. They are great for
simple cases like isNullOrEmpty() and isNullOrBlank(), especially with
self-explanatory names that imply the receiver might be null. In general,
it’s better to declare regular (non-nullable) extensions. Safe calls and
explicit checks clarify the receiver’s nullability, while extensions for
nullable types may conceal nullability and confuse the reader of your code
(probably, “future you”).

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Introduction to Generics
Generics create parameterized types: components that work across
multiple types.
The term “generic” means “pertaining or appropriate to large groups of
classes.” The original intent of generics in programming languages was to
provide the programmer maximum expressiveness when writing classes or
functions, by loosening type constraints on those classes or functions.
One of the most compelling initial motivations for generics is to create
collection classes, which you’ve seen in the Lists, Sets and Maps used for
the examples in this book. A collection is an object that holds other objects.
Many programs require you to hold a group of objects while you use them,
so collections are one of the most reusable of class libraries.
Let’s look at a class that holds a single object. This class specifies the exact
type of that object:
// IntroGenerics/RigidHolder.kt
package introgenerics
import atomictest.eq
data class Automobile(val brand: String)
class RigidHolder(private val a: Automobile) {
fun getValue() = a
}
fun main() {
val holder = RigidHolder(Automobile("BMW"))
holder.getValue() eq
"Automobile(brand=BMW)"
}

RigidHolder is not a particularly reusable tool; it can’t hold anything but an
Automobile. We would prefer not to write a new type of holder for every

different type. To achieve this, we use a type parameter instead of
Automobile.

To define a generic type, add angle brackets (<>) containing one or more
generic placeholders and put this generic specification after the class name.
Here, the generic placeholder T represents the unknown type and is used
within the class as if it were a regular type:
// IntroGenerics/GenericHolder.kt
package introgenerics
import atomictest.eq
class GenericHolder<T>(
private val value: T
) {
fun getValue(): T = value
}

// [1]

fun main() {
val h1 = GenericHolder(Automobile("Ford"))
val a: Automobile = h1.getValue()
// [2]
a eq "Automobile(brand=Ford)"
val h2 = GenericHolder(1)
val i: Int = h2.getValue()
i eq 1

}

// [3]

val h3 = GenericHolder("Chartreuse")
val s: String = h3.getValue()
// [4]
s eq "Chartreuse"

[1] GenericHolder stores a T, and its member function getValue()
returns a T.
When you call getValue() as in [2], [3] or [4] , the result is automatically
the right type.
It seems like we might be able to solve this problem with a “universal
type”—a type that is the parent of all other types. In Kotlin, this universal
type is called Any. As the name implies, Any allows any type of argument. If
you want to pass a variety of types to a function and they have nothing in
common, Any solves the problem.
At a glance, it looks like we might be able to use Any instead of T in
GenericHolder.kt:
// IntroGenerics/AnyInstead.kt
package introgenerics
import atomictest.eq
class AnyHolder(private val value: Any) {

}

fun getValue(): Any = value

class Dog {
fun bark() = "Ruff!"
}
fun main() {
val holder = AnyHolder(Dog())
val any = holder.getValue()
// Doesn't compile:
// any.bark()

}

val genericHolder = GenericHolder(Dog())
val dog = genericHolder.getValue()
dog.bark() eq "Ruff!"

Any does in fact work for simple cases, but as soon as we need the specific
type—to call bark() for the Dog—it doesn’t work because we lose track of
the fact that it’s a Dog when it is assigned to the Any. When we pass a Dog as
an Any, the result is just an Any, which has no bark().

Using generics retains the information that, in this case, we actually have a
Dog, which means we can perform Dog operations on the object returned by
getValue().

Generic Functions
To define a generic function, specify a generic type parameter in angle
brackets before the function name:
// IntroGenerics/GenericFunction.kt
package introgenerics
import atomictest.eq
fun <T> identity(arg: T): T = arg
fun main() {
identity("Yellow") eq "Yellow"
identity(1) eq 1
val d: Dog = identity(Dog())
d.bark() eq "Ruff!"
}

d has type Dog because identity() is a generic function and returns a T.

The Kotlin standard library contains many generic extension functions for
collections. To write a generic extension function, put the generic

specification before the receiver. For example, notice how first() and
firstOrNull() are defined:
// IntroGenerics/GenericListExtensions.kt
package introgenerics
import atomictest.eq
fun <T> List<T>.first(): T {
if (isEmpty())
throw NoSuchElementException("Empty List")
return this[0]
}
fun <T> List<T>.firstOrNull(): T? =
if (isEmpty()) null else this[0]
fun main() {
listOf(1, 2, 3).first() eq 1

}

val i: Int? =
listOf(1, 2, 3).firstOrNull()
i eq 1

// [1]

val s: String? =
listOf<String>().firstOrNull()
s eq null

// [2]

first() and firstOrNull() work with any kind of List. To return a T,

they must be generic functions.

Notice how firstOrNull() specifies a nullable return type. Line [1] shows
that calling the function on List<Int> returns the nullable type Int?. Line
[2] shows that calling firstOrNull() on List<String> returns String?.
Kotlin requires the ? on lines [1] and [2]—take them out and see the error
messages.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Extension Properties
Just as functions can be extension functions, properties can be
extension properties.
The receiver type specification for extension properties is similar to the
syntax for extension functions—the extended type comes right before the
function or property name:
fun ReceiverType.extensionFunction() { ... }
val ReceiverType.extensionProperty: PropType
get() { ... }

An extension property requires a custom getter. The property value is
computed for each access:
// ExtensionProperties/StringIndices.kt
package extensionproperties
import atomictest.eq
val String.indices: IntRange
get() = 0 until length
fun main() {
"abc".indices eq 0..2
}

Although you can convert any extension function without parameters into a
property, we recommend thinking about it first. The reasons described in
Property Accessors for choosing between properties and functions also
apply to extension properties. Preferring a property over a function makes
sense only if it’s simple enough and improves readability.
You can define a generic extension property. Here, we convert
firstOrNull() from Introduction to Generics to an extension property:
// ExtensionProperties/GenericListExt.kt
package extensionproperties
import atomictest.eq
val <T> List<T>.firstOrNull: T?

get() = if (isEmpty()) null else this[0]
fun main() {
listOf(1, 2, 3).firstOrNull eq 1
listOf<String>().firstOrNull eq null
}

The Kotlin Style Guide recommends a function over a property if the
function throws an exception.
When the generic argument type isn’t used, you may replace it with *. This
is called a star projection:
// ExtensionProperties/ListOfStar.kt
package extensionproperties
import atomictest.eq
val List<*>.indices: IntRange
get() = 0 until size
fun main() {
listOf(1).indices eq 0..0
listOf('a', 'b', 'c', 'd').indices eq 0..3
emptyList<Int>().indices eq IntRange.EMPTY
}

When you use List<*>, you lose all specific information about the type
contained in the List. For example, an element of a List<*> can only be
assigned to Any?:
// ExtensionProperties/AnyFromListOfStar.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list: List<*> = listOf(1, 2)
val any: Any? = list[0]
any eq 1
}

We have no information whether a value stored in a List<*> is nullable or
not, which is why it can be only assigned to a nullable Any? type.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

break & continue
break and continue allow you to “jump” within a loop.

Early programmers wrote directly to the processor, using either numerical
opcodes as instructions, or assembly language, which translates into
opcodes. This kind of programming is as low-level as you can get. For
example, many coding decisions were facilitated by “jumping” directly to
other places in the code. Early higher-level languages (including
FORTRAN, ALGOL, Pascal, C and C++) duplicated this practice by
implementing a goto keyword.
goto made assembly-language programmers more comfortable as they

transitioned to higher-level languages. As we accumulated more experience,
however, the programming community discovered that unconditional jumps
produce complicated and un-maintainable code. This generated a large
backlash against goto, and most subsequent languages have avoided any
kind of unconditional jump.
Kotlin provides a constrained jump in the form of break and continue.
These are tied to the looping constructs for, while and do-while—you can
only use break and continue from within such loops. In addition, continue
can only jump to the beginning of a loop, and break can only jump to the
end of a loop.
In practice you rarely use break and continue when writing new Kotlin
code. These features are artifacts from earlier languages. Although they are
occasionally useful, you’ll learn in this book that Kotlin provides superior
mechanisms.
Here’s an example with a for loop containing both a continue and a break:
// BreakAndContinue/ForControl.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {

}

val nums = mutableListOf(0)
for (i in 4 until 100 step 4) { // [1]
if (i == 8) continue
// [2]
if (i == 40) break
// [3]
nums.add(i)
}
// [4]
nums eq "[0, 4, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36]"

The example aggregates Ints into a mutable List. The continue at [2]
jumps back to the beginning of the loop, which is the opening brace at [1].
It “continues” execution starting with the next iteration of the loop. Note
that the code following continue inside the for loop body is not executed:
nums.add(i) is not called when i == 8 so you don’t see it in the resulting
nums.
When i == 40, break is executed at [3], which “breaks out” of the for loop
by jumping to the end of its scope at [4]. The numbers beginning at 40 are
not added to the resulting List because the for loop stops executing.
Lines [2] and [3] are interchangeable because their logic doesn’t overlap.
Try swapping the lines and verify that the output doesn’t change.
We can rewrite ForControl.kt using a while loop:
// BreakAndContinue/WhileControl.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val nums = mutableListOf(0)
var i = 0
while (i < 100) {
i += 4
if (i == 8) continue
if (i == 40) break
nums.add(i)
}
nums eq "[0, 4, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36]"
}

The break and continue behavior remains the same, as it does for a dowhile loop:
// BreakAndContinue/DoWhileControl.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val nums = mutableListOf(0)
var i = 0

}

do {
i += 4
if (i == 8) continue
if (i == 40) break
nums.add(i)
} while (i < 100)
nums eq "[0, 4, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36]"

A do-while loop always executes at least once, because the while test is at
the end of the loop.

Labels
Plain break and continue can jump no further than the boundaries of their
local loop. Labels allow break and continue to jump to the boundaries of
enclosing loops, so you aren’t limited to the scope of the current loop.
You create a label by using label@, where label can be any name. Here,
the label is outer:
// BreakAndContinue/ForLabeled.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val strings = mutableListOf<String>()
outer@ for (c in 'a'..'e') {
for (i in 1..9) {
if (i == 5) continue@outer
if ("$c$i" == "c3") break@outer
strings.add("$c$i")
}
}
strings eq listOf("a1", "a2", "a3", "a4",
"b1", "b2", "b3", "b4", "c1", "c2")
}

The labeled continue expression continue@outer continues back to the
label outer@. The labeled break expression break@outer finds the end of
the block named outer@, and proceeds from there.
Labels work with while and do-while:
// BreakAndContinue/WhileLabeled.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val strings = mutableListOf<String>()
var c = 'a' - 1
outer@ while (c < 'f') {

c += 1
var i = 0
do {
i++
if (i == 5) continue@outer
if ("$c$i" == "c3") break@outer
strings.add("$c$i")
} while (i < 10)

}

}
strings eq listOf("a1", "a2", "a3", "a4",
"b1", "b2", "b3", "b4", "c1", "c2")

WhileLabeled.kt can be rewritten as:
// BreakAndContinue/Improved.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val strings = mutableListOf<String>()
for (c in 'a'..'c') {
for (i in 1..4) {
val value = "$c$i"
if (value < "c3") {
// [1]
strings.add(value)
}
}
}
strings eq listOf("a1", "a2", "a3", "a4",
"b1", "b2", "b3", "b4", "c1", "c2")
}

This is far more comprehensible. In line [1], we only add Strings that
occur (alphabetically) before "c3". This produces the same behavior as
using break when reaching "c3" in the previous versions of the example.
break and continue tend to create complicated and un-maintainable code.

Although these jumps are somewhat more civilized than “goto,” they still
interrupt program flow. Code without jumps is almost always easier to
understand.

In some cases, you can write the conditions for iteration explicitly instead
of using break and continue, as we did in the example above. In other
cases, you can restructure your code and introduce new functions. Both
break and continue can be replaced with return if you extract the whole
loop or the loop body into new functions. In the next section, Functional

Programming, you’ll learn to write clear code without using break and
continue.
Consider alternative approaches, and choose the simpler and more readable
solution. This typically won’t include break and continue.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

SECTION IV: FUNCTIONAL
PROGRAMMING
The unavoidable price of reliability is simplicity—C.A.R. Hoare

Lambdas
Lambdas produce compact code that’s easier to understand.
A lambda (also called a function literal) is a low-ceremony function: it has
no name, requires a minimal amount of code to create, and you can insert it
directly into other code.
As a starting point, consider map(), which works with collections like List.
The parameter for map() is a transformation function which is applied to
each element in a collection. map() returns a new List containing all the
transformed elements. Here, we transform each List item to a String
surrounded with []:
// Lambdas/BasicLambda.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)
val result = list.map({ n: Int -> "[$n]" })
result eq listOf("[1]", "[2]", "[3]", "[4]")
}

The lambda is the code within the curly braces used in the initialization of
result. The parameter list is separated from the function body by an arrow
-> (the same arrow used in when expressions).
The function body can be one or more expressions. The final expression
becomes the return value of the lambda.
BasicLambda.kt shows the full lambda syntax, but this can often be

simplified. We typically create and use a lambda in place, which means
Kotlin can usually infer type information. Here, the type of n is inferred:
// Lambdas/LambdaTypeInference.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)
val result = list.map({ n -> "[$n]" })

}

result eq listOf("[1]", "[2]", "[3]", "[4]")

Kotlin can tell n is an Int because the lambda is being used with a
List<Int>.
If there’s only a single parameter, Kotlin generates the name it for that
parameter, which means we no longer need the n ->:
// Lambdas/LambdaIt.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)
val result = list.map({ "[$it]" })
result eq listOf("[1]", "[2]", "[3]", "[4]")
}

map() works with a List of any type. Here, Kotlin infers the type of the
lambda argument it to be Char:
// Lambdas/Mapping.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf('a', 'b', 'c', 'd')
val result =
list.map({ "[${it.toUpperCase()}]" })
result eq listOf("[A]", "[B]", "[C]", "[D]")
}

If the lambda is the only function argument, or the last argument, you can
remove the parentheses around the curly braces, producing cleaner syntax:
// Lambdas/OmittingParentheses.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf('a', 'b', 'c', 'd')
val result =
list.map { "[${it.toUpperCase()}]" }
result eq listOf("[A]", "[B]", "[C]", "[D]")
}

If the function takes more than one argument, all except the last lambda
argument must be in parentheses. For example, you can specify the last
argument for joinToString() as a lambda. The lambda is used to transform
each element to a String, then all the elements are joined:

// Lambdas/JoinToString.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(9, 11, 23, 32)
list.joinToString(" ") { "[$it]" } eq
"[9] [11] [23] [32]"
}

If you want to provide the lambda as a named argument, you must place the
lambda inside the parentheses of the argument list:
// Lambdas/LambdaAndNamedArgs.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(9, 11, 23, 32)
list.joinToString(
separator = " ",
transform = { "[$it]" }
) eq "[9] [11] [23] [32]"
}

Here’s the syntax for a lambda with more than one parameter:
// Lambdas/TwoArgLambda.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf('a', 'b', 'c')
list.mapIndexed { index, element ->
"[$index: $element]"
} eq listOf("[0: a]", "[1: b]", "[2: c]")
}

This uses the mapIndexed() library function, which takes each element in
list and produces the index of that element together with the element. The
lambda that we apply after mapIndexed() requires two arguments to match
the index and the element (which is a character, in the case of List<Char>).
If you aren’t using a particular argument, you can ignore it using an
underscore to eliminate compiler warnings about unused identifiers:
// Lambdas/Underscore.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf('a', 'b', 'c')
list.mapIndexed { index, _ ->
"[$index]"
} eq listOf("[0]", "[1]", "[2]")
}

Note that Underscore.kt can be rewritten using list.indices:
// Lambdas/ListIndicesMap.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf('a', 'b', 'c')
list.indices.map {
"[$it]"
} eq listOf("[0]", "[1]", "[2]")
}

Lambdas can have zero parameters, in which case you can leave the arrow
for emphasis, but the Kotlin style guide recommends omitting the arrow:
// Lambdas/ZeroArguments.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
run { -> trace("A Lambda") }
run { trace("Without args") }
trace eq """
A Lambda
Without args
"""
}

The standard library run() simply calls its lambda argument.
You can use a lambda anywhere you use a regular function, but if the
lambda becomes too complex it’s often better to define a named function,
for clarity, even if you’re only going to use it once.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

The Importance of Lambdas
Lambdas may seem like syntax sugar, but they provide important
power to your programming.
Code often manipulates the contents of a collection, and typically repeats
these manipulations with minor modifications. Consider selecting elements
from a collection, such as people under a given age, employees with a
specific role, citizens of a particular city, or unfinished orders. Here’s an
example that selects even numbers from a list. Suppose we don’t have a rich
library of functions for working with collections—we’d have to implement
our own filterEven() operation:
// ImportanceOfLambdas/FilterEven.kt
package importanceoflambdas
import atomictest.eq
fun filterEven(nums: List<Int>): List<Int> {
val result = mutableListOf<Int>()
for (i in nums) {
if (i % 2 == 0) {
// [1]
result += i
}
}
return result
}
fun main() {
filterEven(listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)) eq
listOf(2, 4)
}

If an element has a remainder of 0 when divided by 2, it’s appended to the
result.
Imagine you need something similar, but for numbers that are greater than
2. You can copy filterEven() and modify the small part that chooses the
elements included in the result:
// ImportanceOfLambdas/GreaterThan2.kt
package importanceoflambdas
import atomictest.eq

fun greaterThan2(nums: List<Int>): List<Int> {
val result = mutableListOf<Int>()
for (i in nums) {
if (i > 2) {
// [1]
result += i
}
}
return result
}
fun main() {
greaterThan2(listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)) eq
listOf(3, 4)
}

The only notable difference between the previous two examples is the line
of code ([1] in both cases) specifying the desired elements.
With lambdas, we can use the same function for both cases. The standard
library function filter() takes a predicate specifying the elements you
want to preserve, and this predicate can be a lambda:
// ImportanceOfLambdas/Filter.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)
val even = list.filter { it % 2 == 0 }
val greaterThan2 = list.filter { it > 2 }
even eq listOf(2, 4)
greaterThan2 eq listOf(3, 4)
}

Now we have clear, concise code that avoids repetition. Both even and
greaterThan2 use filter() and differ only in the predicate. filter() has
been heavily tested, so you’re less likely to introduce a bug.
Notice that filter() handles the iteration that would otherwise require
handwritten code. Although managing the iteration yourself might not seem
like much effort, it’s one more error-prone detail and one more place to
make a mistake. Because they’re so “obvious,” such mistakes are
particularly hard to find.
This is one of the hallmarks of functional programming, of which map()
and filter() are examples. Functional programming solves problems in
small steps. The functions often do things that seem trivial—it’s not that

hard to write your own code rather than using map() and filter().
However, once you have a collection of these small, debugged solutions,
you can easily combine them without debugging at every level. This allows
you to create more robust code, more quickly.
You can store a lambda in a var or val. This allows reuse of that lambda’s
logic, by passing it as an argument to different functions:
// ImportanceOfLambdas/StoringLambda.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)
val isEven = { e: Int -> e % 2 == 0 }
list.filter(isEven) eq listOf(2, 4)
list.any(isEven) eq true
}

isEven checks whether a number is even, and this reference is passed as an
argument to both filter() and any(). The library function any() checks
whether there’s at least one element in the List satisfying a given predicate.
When we define isEven we must specify the parameter type because there

is no context for the type inferencer.

Another important quality of lambdas is the ability to refer to elements
outside their scope. When a function “closes over” or “captures” the
elements in its environment, we call it a closure. Unfortunately, some
languages conflate the term “closure” with the idea of a lambda. The two
concepts are completely distinct: you can have lambdas without closures,
and closures without lambdas.
When a language supports closures, it “just works” the way you expect:
// ImportanceOfLambdas/Closures.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 5, 7, 10)
val divider = 5
list.filter { it % divider == 0 } eq
listOf(5, 10)
}

Here, the lambda “captures” the val divider that is defined outside the
lambda. The lambda not only reads captured elements, it can also modify

them:
// ImportanceOfLambdas/Closures2.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 5, 7, 10)
var sum = 0
val divider = 5
list.filter { it % divider == 0 }
.forEach { sum += it }
sum eq 15
}

The forEach() library function applies the specified action to each element
of the collection.
Although you can capture the mutable variable sum as in Closures2.kt,
you can usually change your code and avoid modifying the state of your
environment:
// ImportanceOfLambdas/Sum.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 5, 7, 10)
val divider = 5
list.filter { it % divider == 0 }
.sum() eq 15
}

sum() works on a list of numbers, adding all the elements in the list.

An ordinary function can also close over surrounding elements:
// ImportanceOfLambdas/FunctionClosure.kt
package importanceoflambdas
import atomictest.eq
var x = 100
fun useX() {
x++
}
fun main() {
useX()
x eq 101
}

useX() captures and modifies x from its surroundings.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Operations on Collections
An essential aspect of functional languages is the ability to easily
perform batch operations on collections of objects.
Most functional languages provide powerful support for working with
collections, and Kotlin is no exception. You’ve already seen map(),
filter(), any() and forEach(). This atom shows additional operations
available for Lists and other collections.
We start by looking at various ways to manufacture Lists. Here, we
initialize Lists using lambdas:
// OperationsOnCollections/CreatingLists.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
// The lambda argument is the element index:
val list1 = List(10) { it }
list1 eq "[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]"
// A list of a single value:
val list2 = List(10) { 0 }
list2 eq "[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]"
// A list of letters:
val list3 = List(10) { 'a' + it }
list3 eq "[a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j]"

}

// Cycle through a sequence:
val list4 = List(10) { list3[it % 3] }
list4 eq "[a, b, c, a, b, c, a, b, c, a]"

This version of the List constructor has two parameters: the size of the
List and a lambda that initializes each List element (the element index is
passed in as the it argument). Remember that if a lambda is the last
argument, it can be separated from the argument list.
MutableLists can be initialized in the same way. Here we see the
initialization lambda both inside the argument list (mutableList1) and
separated from the argument list (mutableList2):

// OperationsOnCollections/ListInit.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val mutableList1 =
MutableList(5, { 10 * (it + 1) })
mutableList1 eq "[10, 20, 30, 40, 50]"
val mutableList2 =
MutableList(5) { 10 * (it + 1) }
mutableList2 eq "[10, 20, 30, 40, 50]"
}

Note that List() and MutableList() are not constructors, but functions.
Their names intentionally begin with an upper-case letter to make them
look like constructors.
Many collection functions take a predicate and test it against the elements
of a collection, some of which we’ve already seen:
filter() produces a list containing all elements matching the given

predicate.
any() returns true if at least one element matches the predicate.
all() checks whether all elements match the predicate.
none() checks that no elements match the predicate.
find() and firstOrNull() both return the first element matching the
predicate, or null if no such element was found.
lastOrNull() returns the last element matching the predicate, or null.
count() returns the number of elements matching the predicate.
Here are simple examples for each function:
// OperationsOnCollections/Predicates.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(-3, -1, 5, 7, 10)
list.filter { it > 0 } eq listOf(5, 7, 10)
list.count { it > 0 } eq 3
list.find { it > 0 } eq 5
list.firstOrNull { it > 0 } eq 5
list.lastOrNull { it < 0 } eq -1
list.any { it > 0 } eq true
list.any { it != 0 } eq true
list.all { it > 0 } eq false
list.all { it != 0 } eq true

}

list.none { it > 0 } eq false
list.none { it == 0 } eq true

filter() and count() apply the predicate against each element, while
any() or find() stop when the first matching result is found. For example,
if the first element satisfies the predicate, any() returns true right away,
while find() returns the first matching element. The only time all the

elements are processed is if the list contains no elements matching the given
predicate.
filter() returns a group of elements satisfying the given predicate.

Sometimes you may be interested in the remaining group—the elements
that don’t satisfy the predicate. filterNot() produces this remaining
group, but partition() can be more useful because it simultaneously
produces both lists:
// OperationsOnCollections/Partition.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(-3, -1, 5, 7, 10)
val isPositive = { i: Int -> i > 0 }
list.filter(isPositive) eq "[5, 7, 10]"
list.filterNot(isPositive) eq "[-3, -1]"

}

val (pos, neg) = list.partition { it > 0 }
pos eq "[5, 7, 10]"
neg eq "[-3, -1]"

partition() produces a Pair object containing Lists. Using Destructuring
Declarations, you can assign the elements of the Pair to a parenthesized
group of vars or vals. Destructuring means defining multiple vars or vals

and initializing them simultaneously, from the expression on the right side
of the assignment. Here, destructuring is used with a custom function:

// OperationsOnCollections/PairOfLists.kt
package operationsoncollections
import atomictest.eq
fun createPair() = Pair(1, "one")
fun main() {
val (i, s) = createPair()
i eq 1

}

s eq "one"

filterNotNull() produces a new List with the nulls removed:
// OperationsOnCollections/FilterNotNull.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, null)
list.filterNotNull() eq "[1, 2]"
}

In Lists, we saw functions such as sum() or sorted() applied to a list of
comparable elements. These functions can’t be called on lists of nonsummable or non-comparable elements, but they have counterparts named
sumBy() and sortedBy(). You pass a function (often a lambda) as an
argument, which specifies the attribute to use for the operation:
// OperationsOnCollections/ByOperations.kt
package operationsoncollections
import atomictest.eq
data class Product(
val description: String,
val price: Double
)
fun main() {
val products = listOf(
Product("bread", 2.0),
Product("wine", 5.0)
)
products.sumByDouble { it.price } eq 7.0

}

products.sortedByDescending { it.price } eq
"[Product(description=wine, price=5.0)," +
" Product(description=bread, price=2.0)]"
products.minByOrNull { it.price } eq
Product("bread", 2.0)

Note that we have two functions sumBy() and sumByDouble() to sum
integer and double values, respectively. sorted() and sortedBy() sort the
collection in ascending order, while sortedDescending() and
sortedByDescending() sort the collection in descending order.
minByOrNull returns a minimum value based on a given criteria or null if

the list is empty.

take() and drop() produce or remove (respectively) the first element,
while takeLast() and dropLast() produce or remove the last element.

These have counterparts that accept a predicate specifying the elements to
take or drop:

// OperationsOnCollections/TakeOrDrop.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf('a', 'b', 'c', 'X', 'Z')
list.takeLast(3) eq "[c, X, Z]"
list.takeLastWhile { it.isUpperCase() } eq
"[X, Z]"
list.drop(1) eq "[b, c, X, Z]"
list.dropWhile { it.isLowerCase() } eq
"[X, Z]"
}

Operations like those you’ve seen for Lists are also available for Sets:
// OperationsOnCollections/SetOperations.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val set = setOf("a", "ab", "ac")
set.maxByOrNull { it.length }?.length eq 2
set.filter {
it.contains('b')
} eq listOf("ab")
set.map { it.length } eq listOf(1, 2, 2)
}

maxByOrNull() returns null if a collection is empty, so its result is nullable.

Note that filter() and map(), when applied to a Set, return their results in
a List.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Member References
You can pass a member reference as a function argument.
Member references—for functions, properties and constructors—can
replace trivial lambdas that simply call the corresponding function, property
or constructor.
A member reference uses a double colon to separate the class name from
the function or property. Here, Message::isRead is a member reference:
// MemberReferences/PropertyReference.kt
package memberreferences1
import atomictest.eq
data class Message(
val sender: String,
val text: String,
val isRead: Boolean
)
fun main() {
val messages = listOf(
Message("Kitty", "Hey!", true),
Message("Kitty", "Where are you?", false))
val unread =
messages.filterNot(Message::isRead)
unread.size eq 1
unread.single().text eq "Where are you?"
}

To filter for unread messages, we use the library function filterNot(),
which takes a predicate. In our case, the predicate indicates whether a
message is already read. We could pass a lambda, but instead we pass the
property reference Message::isRead.
Property references are useful when specifying a non-trivial sort order:
// MemberReferences/SortWith.kt
import memberreferences1.Message
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val messages = listOf(

}

Message("Kitty", "Hey!", true),
Message("Kitty", "Where are you?", false),
Message("Boss", "Meeting today", false))
messages.sortedWith(compareBy(
Message::isRead, Message::sender)) eq
listOf(
// First unread, sorted by sender:
Message("Boss", "Meeting today", false),
Message("Kitty",
"Where are you?", false),
// Then read, also sorted by sender:
Message("Kitty", "Hey!", true))

The library function sortedWith() sorts a list using a comparator, which is
an object used to compare two elements. The library function compareBy()
builds a comparator based on its parameters, which are a list of predicates.
Using compareBy() with a single argument is equivalent to calling
sortedBy().

Function References
Suppose you want to check whether a List contains any important
messages, not just unread messages. You might have a number of
complicated criteria to decide what “important” means. You can put this
logic into a lambda, but that lambda could easily become large and
complex. The code is more understandable if you extract it into a separate
function. In Kotlin you can’t pass a function where a function type is
expected, but you can pass a reference to that function:
// MemberReferences/FunctionReference.kt
package memberreferences2
import atomictest.eq
data class Message(
val sender: String,
val text: String,
val isRead: Boolean,
val attachments: List<Attachment>
)
data class Attachment(
val type: String,
val name: String
)
fun Message.isImportant(): Boolean =
text.contains("Salary increase") ||
attachments.any {
it.type == "image" &&
it.name.contains("cat")

}
fun main() {
val messages = listOf(Message(
"Boss", "Let's discuss goals " +
"for next year", false,
listOf(Attachment("image", "cute cats"))))
messages.any(Message::isImportant) eq true
}

This new Message class adds an attachments property, and the extension
function Message.isImportant() uses this information. In the call to
messages.any(), we create a reference to an extension function—
references are not limited to member functions.
If you have a top-level function taking Message as its only parameter, you
can pass it as a reference. When you create a reference to a top-level
function, there’s no class name, so it’s written ::function:
// MemberReferences/TopLevelFunctionRef.kt
package memberreferences2
import atomictest.eq
fun ignore(message: Message) =
!message.isImportant() &&
message.sender in setOf("Boss", "Mom")
fun main() {
val text = "Let's discuss goals " +
"for the next year"
val msgs = listOf(
Message("Boss", text, false, listOf()),
Message("Boss", text, false, listOf(
Attachment("image", "cute cats"))))
msgs.filter(::ignore).size eq 1
msgs.filterNot(::ignore).size eq 1
}

Constructor References
You can create a reference to a constructor using the class name.
Here, names.mapIndexed() takes the constructor reference ::Student:
// MemberReferences/ConstructorReference.kt
package memberreferences3
import atomictest.eq
data class Student(
val id: Int,
val name: String
)

fun main() {
val names = listOf("Alice", "Bob")
val students =
names.mapIndexed { index, name ->
Student(index, name)
}
students eq listOf(Student(0, "Alice"),
Student(1, "Bob"))
names.mapIndexed(::Student) eq students
}

mapIndexed() was introduced in Lambdas. It turns each element in names

into the index of that element along with the element. In the definition of
students, these are explicitly mapped into the constructor, but the identical
effect is achieved with names.mapIndexed(::Student). Thus, function and
constructor references can eliminate specifying a long list of parameters
that are simply passed into a lambda. Function and constructor references
are often more readable than lambdas.

Extension Function References
To produce a reference to an extension function, prefix the reference with
the name of the extended type:
// MemberReferences/ExtensionReference.kt
package memberreferences
import atomictest.eq
fun Int.times47() = times(47)
class Frog
fun Frog.speak() = "Ribbit!"
fun goInt(n: Int, g: (Int) -> Int) = g(n)
fun goFrog(frog: Frog, g: (Frog) -> String) =
g(frog)
fun main() {
goInt(12, Int::times47) eq 564
goFrog(Frog(), Frog::speak) eq "Ribbit!"
}

In goInt(), g is a function that expects an Int argument and produces an
Int. In goFrog(), g expects a Frog and produces a String.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Higher-Order Functions
A language supports higher-order functions if its functions can accept
other functions as arguments and produce functions as return values.
Higher-order functions are an essential part of functional programming
languages. In previous atoms, we’ve seen higher-order functions such as
filter(), map(), and any().
You can store a lambda in a reference. Let’s look at the type of this storage:
// HigherOrderFunctions/IsPlus.kt
package higherorderfunctions
import atomictest.eq
val isPlus: (Int) -> Boolean = { it > 0 }
fun main() {
listOf(1, 2, -3).any(isPlus) eq true
}

(Int) -> Boolean is the function type: it starts with parentheses
surrounding zero or more parameter types, then an arrow (->), followed by

the return type:

(Arg1Type, Arg2Type... ArgNType) -> ReturnType

The syntax for calling a function through a reference is identical to an
ordinary function call:
// HigherOrderFunctions/CallingReference.kt
package higherorderfunctions
import atomictest.eq
val helloWorld: () -> String =
{ "Hello, world!" }
val sum: (Int, Int) -> Int =
{ x, y -> x + y }
fun main() {
helloWorld() eq "Hello, world!"

}

sum(1, 2) eq 3

When a function accepts a function parameter, you can either pass it a
function reference or a lambda. Consider how you might define any() from
the standard library:
// HigherOrderFunctions/Any.kt
package higherorderfunctions
import atomictest.eq
fun <T> List<T>.any(
predicate: (T) -> Boolean
): Boolean {
for (element in this) {
if (predicate(element))
return true
}
return false
}
fun main() {
val ints = listOf(1, 2, -3)
ints.any { it > 0 } eq true

}

val strings = listOf("abc", " ")
strings.any { it.isBlank() } eq true
strings.any(String::isNotBlank) eq
true

// [1]
// [2]
// [3]

// [4]
// [5]
// [6]

[1] any() should be usable with Lists of different types so we define
it as an extension to the generic List<T>.
[2] The predicate function is callable with a parameter of type T so
we can apply it to the List elements.
[3] Applying predicate() tells whether that element fits our criteria.
The type of the lambda differs: it’s Int in [4] and String in [5].
[6] A member reference is another way to pass a function reference.
repeat() from the standard library takes a function as its second parameter.
It repeats an action an Int number of times:
// HigherOrderFunctions/RepeatByInt.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
repeat(4) { trace("hi!") }
trace eq "hi! hi! hi! hi!"
}

Consider how repeat() might be defined:
// HigherOrderFunctions/Repeat.kt
package higherorderfunctions
import atomictest.*
fun repeat(
times: Int,
action: (Int) -> Unit
) {
for (index in 0 until times) {
action(index)
}
}
fun main() {
repeat(3) { trace("#$it") }
trace eq "#0 #1 #2"
}

// [1]
// [2]

// [3]

[1] repeat() takes a parameter action of the function type (Int) ->
Unit.
[2] When action() is called, it is passed the current repetition index.
[3] When calling repeat(), you access the repetition index using it
inside the lambda.
A function return type can be nullable:
// HigherOrderFunctions/NullableReturn.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val transform: (String) -> Int? =
{ s: String -> s.toIntOrNull() }
transform("112") eq 112
transform("abc") eq null
val x = listOf("112", "abc")
x.mapNotNull(transform) eq "[112]"
x.mapNotNull { it.toIntOrNull() } eq "[112]"
}

toIntOrNull() might return null, so transform() accepts a String and
returns a nullable Int?. mapNotNull() converts each element in a List into
a nullable value and removes all nulls from the result. It has the same
effect as first calling map(), then applying filterNotNull() to the resulting

list.

Note the difference between making the return type nullable versus making
the whole function type nullable:

// HigherOrderFunctions/NullableFunction.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val returnTypeNullable: (String) -> Int? =
{ null }
val mightBeNull: ((String) -> Int)? = null
returnTypeNullable("abc") eq null
// Doesn't compile without a null check:
// mightBeNull("abc")
if (mightBeNull != null) {
mightBeNull("abc")
}
}

Before calling the function stored in mightBeNull, we must ensure that the
function reference itself is not null.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Manipulating Lists
Zipping and flattening are two common operations that manipulate
Lists.

Zipping
zip() combines two Lists by mimicking the behavior of the zipper on your
jacket, pairing adjacent List elements:
// ManipulatingLists/Zipper.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val left = listOf("a", "b", "c", "d")
val right = listOf("q", "r", "s", "t")
left.zip(right) eq
// [1]
"[(a, q), (b, r), (c, s), (d, t)]"
left.zip(0..4) eq
// [2]
"[(a, 0), (b, 1), (c, 2), (d, 3)]"

}

(10..100).zip(right) eq
// [3]
"[(10, q), (11, r), (12, s), (13, t)]"

[1] Zipping left with right results in a List of Pairs, combining
each element in left with its corresponding element in right.
[2] You can also zip() a List with a range.
[3] The range 10..100 is much larger than right, but the zipping
process stops when one sequence runs out.
zip() can also perform an operation on each Pair it creates:
// ManipulatingLists/ZipAndTransform.kt
package manipulatinglists
import atomictest.eq
data class Person(
val name: String,
val id: Int
)

fun main() {
val names = listOf("Bob", "Jill", "Jim")
val ids = listOf(1731, 9274, 8378)
names.zip(ids) { name, id ->
Person(name, id)
} eq "[Person(name=Bob, id=1731), " +
"Person(name=Jill, id=9274), " +
"Person(name=Jim, id=8378)]"
}

names.zip(ids) { ... } produces a sequence of name-id Pairs, and
applies the lambda to each Pair. The result is a List of initialized Person

objects.

To zip two adjacent elements from a single List, use zipWithNext():
// ManipulatingLists/ZippingWithNext.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf('a', 'b', 'c', 'd')
list.zipWithNext() eq listOf(
Pair('a', 'b'),
Pair('b', 'c'),
Pair('c', 'd'))

}

list.zipWithNext { a, b -> "$a$b" } eq
"[ab, bc, cd]"

The second call to zipWithNext() performs an additional operation after
zipping.

Flattening
flatten() takes a List containing elements that are themselves Lists—a
List of Lists—and flattens it into a List of single elements:
// ManipulatingLists/Flatten.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(
listOf(1, 2),
listOf(4, 5),
listOf(7, 8),
)
list.flatten() eq "[1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8]"
}

flatten() helps us understand another important operation on collections:
flatMap(). Let’s produce all possible Pairs of a range of Ints:
// ManipulatingLists/FlattenAndFlatMap.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val intRange = 1..3
intRange.map { a ->
// [1]
intRange.map { b -> a to b }
} eq "[" +
"[(1, 1), (1, 2), (1, 3)], " +
"[(2, 1), (2, 2), (2, 3)], " +
"[(3, 1), (3, 2), (3, 3)]" +
"]"
intRange.map { a ->
// [2]
intRange.map { b -> a to b }
}.flatten() eq "[" +
"(1, 1), (1, 2), (1, 3), " +
"(2, 1), (2, 2), (2, 3), " +
"(3, 1), (3, 2), (3, 3)" +
"]"

}

intRange.flatMap { a ->
// [3]
intRange.map { b -> a to b }
} eq "[" +
"(1, 1), (1, 2), (1, 3), " +
"(2, 1), (2, 2), (2, 3), " +
"(3, 1), (3, 2), (3, 3)" +
"]"

The lambda in each case is identical: every intRange element is combined
with every intRange element to produce all possible a to b Pairs. But in
[1], map() helpfully preserves the extra information that we have produced
three Lists, one for each element in intRange. There are situations where
this extra information is essential, but here we don’t want it—we just need a
single flat List of all combinations, with no additional structure.
There are two options. [2] shows the application of the flatten() function
to remove this additional structure and flatten the result into a single List,
which is an acceptable approach. However, this is such a common task that
Kotlin provides a combined operation called flatMap(), which performs
both map() and flatten() with a single call. [3] shows flatMap() in
action. You’ll find flatMap() in most languages that support functional
programming.

Here’s a second example of flatMap():
// ManipulatingLists/WhyFlatMap.kt
package manipulatinglists
import atomictest.eq
class Book(
val title: String,
val authors: List<String>
)
fun main() {
val books = listOf(
Book("1984", listOf("George Orwell")),
Book("Ulysses", listOf("James Joyce"))
)
books.map { it.authors }.flatten() eq
listOf("George Orwell", "James Joyce")
books.flatMap { it.authors } eq
listOf("George Orwell", "James Joyce")
}

We’d like a List of authors. map() produces a List of List of authors,
which isn’t very convenient. flatten() takes that and produces a simple
List. flatMap() produces the same results in a single step.
Here, we use map() and flatMap() to combine the enums Suit and Rank,
producing a deck of Cards:
// ManipulatingLists/PlayingCards.kt
package manipulatinglists
import kotlin.random.Random
import atomictest.*
enum class Suit {
Spade, Club, Heart, Diamond
}
enum class Rank(val faceValue: Int) {
Ace(1), Two(2), Three(3), Four(4), Five(5),
Six(6), Seven(7), Eight(8), Nine(9),
Ten(10), Jack(10), Queen(10), King(10)
}
class Card(val rank: Rank, val suit: Suit) {
override fun toString() =
"$rank of ${suit}s"
}
val deck: List<Card> =
Suit.values().flatMap { suit ->
Rank.values().map { rank ->
Card(rank, suit)
}
}

fun main() {
val rand = Random(26)
repeat(7) {
trace("'${deck.random(rand)}'")
}
trace eq """
'Jack of Hearts' 'Four of Hearts'
'Five of Clubs' 'Seven of Clubs'
'Jack of Diamonds' 'Ten of Spades'
'Seven of Spades'
"""
}

In the initialization of deck, the inner Rank.values().map produces four
Lists, one for each Suit, so we use flatMap() on the outer loop to produce
a List<Card> for deck.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Building Maps
Maps are extremely useful programming tools, and there are numerous

ways to construct them.

To create a repeatable set of data, we use the technique shown in
Manipulating Lists, where two Lists are zipped and the result is used in a
lambda to call a constructor, producing a List<Person>:
// BuildingMaps/People.kt
package buildingmaps
data class Person(
val name: String,
val age: Int
)
val names = listOf("Alice", "Arthricia",
"Bob", "Bill", "Birdperson", "Charlie",
"Crocubot", "Franz", "Revolio")
val ages = listOf(21, 15, 25, 25, 42, 21,
42, 21, 33)
fun people(): List<Person> =
names.zip(ages) { name, age ->
Person(name, age)
}

A Map uses keys to provide fast access to its values. By building a Map with
age as the key, we can quickly look up groups of people by age. The library
function groupBy() is one way to create such a Map:
// BuildingMaps/GroupBy.kt
import buildingmaps.*
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val map: Map<Int, List<Person>> =
people().groupBy(Person::age)
map[15] eq listOf(Person("Arthricia", 15))
map[21] eq listOf(
Person("Alice", 21),
Person("Charlie", 21),
Person("Franz", 21))
map[22] eq null
map[25] eq listOf(

}

Person("Bob", 25),
Person("Bill", 25))
map[33] eq listOf(Person("Revolio", 33))
map[42] eq listOf(
Person("Birdperson", 42),
Person("Crocubot", 42))

groupBy()’s parameter produces a Map where each key connects to a List
of elements. Here, all people of the same age are selected by the age key.

You can produce the same groups using the filter() function, but
groupBy() is preferable because it only performs the grouping once. With
filter() you must repeat the grouping for each new key:
// BuildingMaps/GroupByVsFilter.kt
import buildingmaps.*
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val groups =
people().groupBy { it.name.first() }
// groupBy() produces map-speed access:
groups['A'] eq listOf(Person("Alice", 21),
Person("Arthricia", 15))
groups['Z'] eq null
// Must repeat filter() for each character:
people().filter {
it.name.first() == 'A'
} eq listOf(Person("Alice", 21),
Person("Arthricia", 15))
people().filter {
it.name.first() == 'F'
} eq listOf(Person("Franz", 21))

}

people().partition {
it.name.first() == 'A'
} eq Pair(
listOf(Person("Alice", 21),
Person("Arthricia", 15)),
listOf(Person("Bob", 25),
Person("Bill", 25),
Person("Birdperson", 42),
Person("Charlie", 21),
Person("Crocubot", 42),
Person("Franz", 21),
Person("Revolio", 33)))

Here, groupBy() groups people() by their first character, selected by
first(). We can also use filter() to produce the same result by repeating
the lambda code for each character.

If you only need two groups, the partition() function is more direct
because it divides the contents into two lists based on a predicate.
groupBy() is appropriate when you need more than two resulting groups.
associateWith() allows you to take a list of keys and build a Map by

associating each of these keys with a value created by its parameter (here,
the lambda):
// BuildingMaps/AssociateWith.kt
import buildingmaps.*
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val map: Map<Person, String> =
people().associateWith { it.name }
map eq mapOf(
Person("Alice", 21) to "Alice",
Person("Arthricia", 15) to "Arthricia",
Person("Bob", 25) to "Bob",
Person("Bill", 25) to "Bill",
Person("Birdperson", 42) to "Birdperson",
Person("Charlie", 21) to "Charlie",
Person("Crocubot", 42) to "Crocubot",
Person("Franz", 21) to "Franz",
Person("Revolio", 33) to "Revolio")
}

associateBy() reverses the order of association produced by
associateWith()—the selector (the lambda in the following example)

becomes the key:

// BuildingMaps/AssociateBy.kt
import buildingmaps.*
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val map: Map<String, Person> =
people().associateBy { it.name }
map eq mapOf(
"Alice" to Person("Alice", 21),
"Arthricia" to Person("Arthricia", 15),
"Bob" to Person("Bob", 25),
"Bill" to Person("Bill", 25),
"Birdperson" to Person("Birdperson", 42),
"Charlie" to Person("Charlie", 21),
"Crocubot" to Person("Crocubot", 42),
"Franz" to Person("Franz", 21),
"Revolio" to Person("Revolio", 33))
}

associateBy() must be used with a unique selection key and returns a Map

that pairs each unique key to the single element selected by that key.

// BuildingMaps/AssociateByUnique.kt
import buildingmaps.*
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
// associateBy() fails when the key isn't
// unique -- values disappear:
val ages = people().associateBy { it.age }
ages eq mapOf(
21 to Person("Franz", 21),
15 to Person("Arthricia", 15),
25 to Person("Bill", 25),
42 to Person("Crocubot", 42),
33 to Person("Revolio", 33))
}

If multiple values are selected by the predicate, as in ages, only the last one
appears in the generated Map.
getOrElse() tries to look up a value in a Map. Its associated lambda

computes a default value when a key is not present. Because it’s a lambda,
we compute the default key only when necessary:
// BuildingMaps/GetOrPut.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val map = mapOf(1 to "one", 2 to "two")
map.getOrElse(0) { "zero" } eq "zero"

}

val mutableMap = map.toMutableMap()
mutableMap.getOrPut(0) { "zero" } eq
"zero"
mutableMap eq "{1=one, 2=two, 0=zero}"

getOrPut() works on a MutableMap. If a key is present it simply returns the

associated value. If the key isn’t found, it computes the value, puts it into
the map and returns that value.
Many Map operations duplicate ones in List. For example, you can
filter() or map() the contents of a Map. You can filter keys and values
separately:
// BuildingMaps/FilterMap.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val map = mapOf(1 to "one",
2 to "two", 3 to "three", 4 to "four")

map.filterKeys { it % 2 == 1 } eq
"{1=one, 3=three}"
map.filterValues { it.contains('o') } eq
"{1=one, 2=two, 4=four}"

}

map.filter { entry ->
entry.key % 2 == 1 &&
entry.value.contains('o')
} eq "{1=one}"

All three functions filter(), filterKeys() and filterValues() produce
a new map containing only the elements that satisfy the predicate.
filterKeys() applies its predicate to the keys, and filterValues() applies
its predicate to the values.

Applying Operations to Maps
To map() a Map sounds like a tautology, like saying “salt is salty.” The word
map represents two distinct ideas:
Transforming a collection
The key-value data structure
In many programming languages, the word map is used for both concepts.
For clarity, we say transform a map when applying map() to a Map.
Here we demonstrate map(), mapKeys() and mapValues():
// BuildingMaps/TransformingMap.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val even = mapOf(2 to "two", 4 to "four")
even.map {
// [1]
"${it.key}=${it.value}"
} eq listOf("2=two", "4=four")
even.map { (key, value) ->
"$key=$value"
} eq listOf("2=two", "4=four")

// [2]

even.mapKeys { (num, _) -> -num }
// [3]
.mapValues { (_, str) -> "minus $str" } eq
mapOf(-2 to "minus two",
-4 to "minus four")
even.map { (key, value) ->
-key to "minus $value"

}

}.toMap() eq mapOf(-2 to "minus two", // [4]
-4 to "minus four")

[1] Here, map() takes a predicate with a Map.Entry argument. We
access its contents as it.key and it.value.
[2] You can also use a destructuring declaration to place the entry
contents into key and value.
[3] If a parameter isn’t used, an underscore (_) avoids compiler
complaints. mapKeys() and mapValues() return a new map, with all
keys or values transformed accordingly.
[4], map() returns a list of pairs, so to produce a Map we use the explicit
conversion toMap().
Functions like any() and all() can also be applied to Maps:
// BuildingMaps/SimilarOperation.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val map = mapOf(1 to "one",
-2 to "minus two")
map.any { (key, _) -> key < 0 } eq true
map.all { (key, _) -> key < 0 } eq false
map.maxByOrNull { it.key }?.value eq "one"
}

any() checks whether any of the entries in a Map satisfy the given predicate,
while all() is true only if all entries in the Map satisfy the predicate.
maxByOrNull() finds the maximum entry based on the given criteria. There

may not be a maximum entry, so the result is nullable.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Sequences
A Kotlin Sequence is like a List, but you can only iterate through a
Sequence—you cannot index into a Sequence. This restriction
produces very efficient chained operations.
Kotlin Sequences are termed streams in other functional languages. Kotlin
had to choose a different name to maintain interoperability with the Java 8
Stream library.
Operations on Lists are performed eagerly—they always happen right
away. When chaining List operations, the first result must be produced
before starting the next operation. Here, each filter(), map() and any()
operation is applied to every element in list:
// Sequences/EagerEvaluation.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)
list.filter { it % 2 == 0 }
.map { it * it }
.any { it < 10 } eq true

}

// Equivalent to:
val mid1 = list.filter { it % 2 == 0 }
mid1 eq listOf(2, 4)
val mid2 = mid1.map { it * it }
mid2 eq listOf(4, 16)
mid2.any { it < 10 } eq true

Eager evaluation is intuitive and straightforward, but can be suboptimal. In
EagerEvaluation.kt, it would make more sense to stop after encountering
the first element that satisfies the any(). For a long sequence, this
optimization might be much faster than evaluating every element and then
searching for a single match.
Eager evaluation is sometimes called horizontal evaluation:

Horizontal Evaluation

The first line contains the initial list contents. Each following line shows the
results from the previous operation. Before the next operation is performed,
all elements on the current horizontal level are processed.
The alternative to eager evaluation is lazy evaluation: a result is computed
only when needed. Performing lazy operations on sequences is sometimes
called vertical evaluation:

Vertical Evaluation

With lazy evaluation, an operation is performed on an element only when
that element’s associated result is requested. If the final result of a
calculation is found before processing the last element, no further elements
are processed.

Converting Lists to Sequences using asSequence() enables lazy
evaluation. All List operations except indexing are also available for
Sequences, so you can usually make this single change and gain the benefits
of lazy evaluation.
The following example shows the above diagrams converted into code. We
perform the identical chain of operations, first on a List, then on a
Sequence. The output shows where each operation is called:
// Sequences/EagerVsLazyEvaluation.kt
package sequences
import atomictest.*
fun Int.isEven(): Boolean {
trace("$this.isEven()")
return this % 2 == 0
}
fun Int.square(): Int {
trace("$this.square()")
return this * this
}
fun Int.lessThanTen(): Boolean {
trace("$this.lessThanTen()")
return this < 10
}
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)
trace(">>> List:")
trace(
list
.filter(Int::isEven)
.map(Int::square)
.any(Int::lessThanTen)
)
trace(">>> Sequence:")
trace(
list.asSequence()
.filter(Int::isEven)
.map(Int::square)
.any(Int::lessThanTen)
)
trace eq """
>>> List:
1.isEven()
2.isEven()
3.isEven()
4.isEven()
2.square()
4.square()
4.lessThanTen()
true
>>> Sequence:
1.isEven()

}

2.isEven()
2.square()
4.lessThanTen()
true
"""

The only difference between the two approaches is the addition of the
asSequence() call, but more elements are processed for the List code than
the Sequence code.
Calling either filter() or map() on a Sequence produces another
Sequence. Nothing happens until you ask for a result from a calculation.
Instead, the new Sequence stores all information about postponed
operations and will perform those operations only when needed:
// Sequences/NoComputationYet.kt
import atomictest.eq
import sequences.*
fun main() {
val r = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)
.asSequence()
.filter(Int::isEven)
.map(Int::square)
r.toString().substringBefore("@") eq
"kotlin.sequences.TransformingSequence"
}

Converting r to a String does not produce the results we want, but just the
identifier for the object (including the @ address of the object in memory,
which we remove using the standard library substringBefore()). The
TransformingSequence just holds the operations but does not perform
them.
There are two categories of Sequence operations: intermediate and
terminal. Intermediate operations return another Sequence as a result.
filter() and map() are intermediate operations. Terminal operations return
a non-Sequence. To do this, a terminal operation executes all stored
computations. In the previous examples, any() is a terminal operation
because it takes a Sequence and returns a Boolean. In the following
example, toList() is terminal because it converts the Sequence to a List,
running all stored operations in the process:

// Sequences/TerminalOperations.kt
import sequences.*
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)
trace(list.asSequence()
.filter(Int::isEven)
.map(Int::square)
.toList())
trace eq """
1.isEven()
2.isEven()
2.square()
3.isEven()
4.isEven()
4.square()
[4, 16]
"""
}

Because a Sequence stores the operations, it can call those operations in any
order, resulting in lazy evaluation.
The following example uses the standard library function
generateSequence() to produce an infinite sequence of natural numbers.
The first argument is the initial element in the sequence, followed by a
lambda defining how the next element is calculated from the previous
element:
// Sequences/GenerateSequence1.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val naturalNumbers =
generateSequence(1) { it + 1 }
naturalNumbers.take(3).toList() eq
listOf(1, 2, 3)
naturalNumbers.take(10).sum() eq 55
}

Collections are a known size, discoverable through their size property.
Sequences are treated as if they are infinite. Here, we decide how many
elements we want using take(), followed by a terminal operation
(toList() or sum()).

There’s an overloaded version of generateSequence() that doesn’t require
the first parameter, only a lambda that returns the next element in the
Sequence. When there are no more elements, it returns null. The following

example generates a Sequence until the “termination flag” XXX appears in its
input:
// Sequences/GenerateSequence2.kt
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
val items = mutableListOf(
"first", "second", "third", "XXX", "4th"
)
val seq = generateSequence {
items.removeAt(0).takeIf { it != "XXX" }
}
seq.toList() eq "[first, second, third]"
capture {
seq.toList()
} eq "IllegalStateException: This " +
"sequence can be consumed only once."
}

removeAt(0) removes and produces the zeroeth element from the List.
takeIf() returns the receiver (the String produced by removeAt(0)) if it
satisfies the given predicate, and null if the predicate fails (when the
String is "XXX").

You can only iterate once through a Sequence. Further attempts produce an
exception. To make multiple passes through a Sequence, first convert it to
some type of Collection.
Here’s an implementation for takeIf(), defined using a generic T so it can
work with any type of argument:
// Sequences/DefineTakeIf.kt
package sequences
import atomictest.eq
fun <T> T.takeIf(
predicate: (T) -> Boolean
): T? {
return if (predicate(this)) this else null
}
fun main() {
"abc".takeIf { it != "XXX" } eq "abc"
"XXX".takeIf { it != "XXX" } eq null
}

Here, generateSequence() and takeIf() produce a decreasing sequence
of numbers:

// Sequences/NumberSequence2.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
generateSequence(6) {
(it - 1).takeIf { it > 0 }
}.toList() eq listOf(6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1)
}

An ordinary if expression can always be used instead of takeIf(), but
introducing an extra identifier can make the if expression clumsy. The
takeIf() version is more functional, especially if it’s used as a part of a
chain of calls.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Local Functions
You can define functions anywhere—even inside other functions.
Named functions defined within other functions are called local functions.
Local functions reduce duplication by extracting repetitive code. At the
same time, they are only visible within the surrounding function, so they
don’t “pollute your namespace.” Here, even though log() is defined just
like any other function, it’s nested inside main():
// LocalFunctions/LocalFunctions.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val logMsg = StringBuilder()
fun log(message: String) =
logMsg.appendLine(message)
log("Starting computation")
val x = 42 // Imitate computation
log("Computation result: $x")
logMsg.toString() eq """
Starting computation
Computation result: 42
"""
}

Local functions are closures: they capture vars or vals from the
surrounding environment that would otherwise have to be passed as
additional parameters. log() uses logMsg, which is defined in its outer
scope. This way, you don’t repeatedly pass logMsg into log().
You can create local extension functions:
// LocalFunctions/LocalExtensions.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
fun String.exclaim() = "$this!"
"Hello".exclaim() eq "Hello!"
"Hallo".exclaim() eq "Hallo!"
"Bonjour".exclaim() eq "Bonjour!"
"Ciao".exclaim() eq "Ciao!"
}

exclaim() is available only inside main().

Here is a demonstration class and example values for use in this atom:
// LocalFunctions/Session.kt
package localfunctions
class Session(
val title: String,
val speaker: String
)
val sessions = listOf(Session(
"Kotlin Coroutines", "Roman Elizarov"))
val favoriteSpeakers = setOf("Roman Elizarov")

You can refer to a local function using a function reference:
// LocalFunctions/LocalFunctionReference.kt
import localfunctions.*
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
fun interesting(session: Session): Boolean {
if (session.title.contains("Kotlin") &&
session.speaker in favoriteSpeakers) {
return true
}
// ... more checks
return false
}
sessions.any(::interesting) eq true
}

interesting() is only used once, so we might be inclined to define it as a
lambda. As you will see later in this atom, the return expressions within
interesting() complicate the task of turning it into a lambda. We can

avoid this complication with an anonymous function. Like local functions,
anonymous functions are defined within other functions—however, an
anonymous function has no name. Anonymous functions are conceptually
similar to lambdas but use the fun keyword. Here’s
LocalFunctionReference.kt rewritten using an anonymous function:
// LocalFunctions/InterestingSessions.kt
import localfunctions.*
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
sessions.any(
fun(session: Session): Boolean {

// [1]

}

if (session.title.contains("Kotlin") &&
session.speaker in favoriteSpeakers) {
return true
}
// ... more checks
return false
}) eq true

[1] An anonymous function looks like a regular function without a
function name. Here, the anonymous function is passed as an argument
to sessions.any().
If a lambda becomes too complicated and hard to read, replace it with a
local function or an anonymous function.

Labels
Here, forEach() acts upon a lambda containing a return:
// LocalFunctions/ReturnFromFun.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
val value = 3
var result = ""
list.forEach {
result += "$it"
if (it == value) {
result eq "123"
return
// [1]
}
}
result eq "Never gets here" // [2]
}

A return expression exits a function defined using fun (that is, not a
lambda). In line [1] this means returning from main(). Line [2] is never
called and you see no output.
To return only from a lambda, and not from the surrounding function, use a
labeled return:
// LocalFunctions/LabeledReturn.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
val value = 3

}

var result = ""
list.forEach {
result += "$it"
if (it == value) return@forEach
}
result eq "12345"

Here, the label is the name of the function that called the lambda. The
labeled return expression return@forEach tells it to return only to the name
forEach.
You can create a label by preceeding the lambda with label@, where label
can be any name:
// LocalFunctions/CustomLabel.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
val value = 3
var result = ""
list.forEach tag@{
// [1]
result += "$it"
if (it == value) return@tag // [2]
}
result eq "12345"
}

[1] This lambda is labeled tag.
[2] return@tag returns from the lambda, not from main().
Let’s replace the anonymous function in InterestingSessions.kt with a
lambda:
// LocalFunctions/ReturnInsideLambda.kt
import localfunctions.*
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
sessions.any { session ->
if (session.title.contains("Kotlin") &&
session.speaker in favoriteSpeakers) {
return@any true
}
// ... more checks
false
} eq true
}

We must return to a label so it exits only the lambda and not main().

Manipulating Local Functions
You can store a lambda or an anonymous function in a var or val, then use
that identifier to call the function. To store a local function, use a function
reference (see Member References).
In the following example, first() creates an anonymous function,
second() uses a lambda, and third() returns a reference to a local
function. fourth() achieves the same effect as third() but uses a more
compact expression body. fifth() produces the same effect using a
lambda:
// LocalFunctions/ReturningFunc.kt
package localfunctions
import atomictest.eq
fun first(): (Int) -> Int {
val func = fun(i: Int) = i + 1
func(1) eq 2
return func
}
fun second(): (String) -> String {
val func2 = { s: String -> "$s!" }
func2("abc") eq "abc!"
return func2
}
fun third(): () -> String {
fun greet() = "Hi!"
return ::greet
}
fun fourth() = fun() = "Hi!"
fun fifth() = { "Hi!" }
fun main() {
val funRef1: (Int) -> Int = first()
val funRef2: (String) -> String = second()
val funRef3: () -> String = third()
val funRef4: () -> String = fourth()
val funRef5: () -> String = fifth()
funRef1(42) eq 43
funRef2("xyz") eq "xyz!"
funRef3() eq "Hi!"
funRef4() eq "Hi!"
funRef5() eq "Hi!"
first()(42) eq 43
second()("xyz") eq "xyz!"
third()() eq "Hi!"
fourth()() eq "Hi!"

}

fifth()() eq "Hi!"

main() first verifies that calling each function does indeed return a function
reference of the expected type. Each funRef is then called with an

appropriate argument. Finally, each function is called and then the returned
function reference is immediately called by adding an appropriate argument
list. For example, calling first() returns a function, so we call that
function by appending the argument list (42).
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Folding Lists
fold() combines all elements of a list, in order, to generate a single

result.

A common exercise is to implement operations such as sum() or reverse()
using fold(). Here, fold() sums a sequence:
// FoldingLists/SumViaFold.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 10, 100, 1000)
list.fold(0) { sum, n ->
sum + n
} eq 1111
}

fold() takes the initial value (its argument, 0 in this case) and successively

applies the operation (expressed here as a lambda) to combine the current
accumulated value with each element. fold() first adds 0 (the initial value)
and 1 to get 1. That becomes the sum, which is then added to the 10 to get
11, which becomes the new sum. The operation is repeated for two more
elements: 100 and 1000. This produces 111 and 1111. The fold() will stop
when there is nothing else in the list, returning the final sum of 1111. Of
course, fold() doesn’t really know it’s doing a “sum”—the choice of
identifier name was ours, to make it easier to understand.
To illuminate the steps in a fold(), here’s SumViaFold.kt using an
ordinary for loop:

// FoldingLists/FoldVsForLoop.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 10, 100, 1000)
var accumulator = 0
val operation =
{ sum: Int, i: Int -> sum + i }
for (i in list) {
accumulator = operation(accumulator, i)
}

}

accumulator eq 1111

fold() accumulates values by successively applying operation to combine

the current element with the accumulator value.

Although fold() is an important concept and the only way to accumulate
values in pure functional languages, you may sometimes still use an
ordinary for loop in Kotlin.
foldRight() processes elements starting from right to left, as opposed to
fold() which processes the elements from left to right. This example

demonstrates the difference:
// FoldingLists/FoldRight.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
val list = listOf('a', 'b', 'c', 'd')
list.fold("*") { acc, elem ->
"($acc) + $elem"
} eq "((((*) + a) + b) + c) + d"
list.foldRight("*") { elem, acc ->
"$elem + ($acc)"
} eq "a + (b + (c + (d + (*))))"
}

fold() first applies the operation to a, as we can see in (*) + a, while
foldRight() first processes the right-hand element d, and processes a last.
fold() and foldRight() take an explicit accumulator value as the first
argument. Sometimes the first element can act as an initial value. reduce()
and reduceRight() behave like fold() and foldRight() but use the first

and last element, respectively, as the initial value:

// FoldingLists/ReduceAndReduceRight.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val chars = "A B C D E F G H I".split(" ")
chars.fold("X") { a, e -> "$a $e"} eq
"X A B C D E F G H I"
chars.foldRight("X") { a, e -> "$a $e" } eq
"A B C D E F G H I X"
chars.reduce { a, e -> "$a $e" } eq
"A B C D E F G H I"
chars.reduceRight { a, e -> "$a $e" } eq
"A B C D E F G H I"
}

runningFold() and runningReduce() produce a List containing all the
intermediate steps of the process. The final value in the List is the result of
the fold() or reduce():
// FoldingLists/RunningFold.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(11, 13, 17, 19)
list.fold(7) { sum, n ->
sum + n
} eq 67
list.runningFold(7) { sum, n ->
sum + n
} eq "[7, 18, 31, 48, 67]"
list.reduce { sum, n ->
sum + n
} eq 60
list.runningReduce { sum, n ->
sum + n
} eq "[11, 24, 41, 60]"
}

runningFold() first stores the initial value (7), then stores each
intermediate result. runningReduce() keeps track of each sum value.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Recursion
Recursion is the programming technique of calling a function within
that same function. Tail recursion is an optimization that can be
explicitly applied to some recursive functions.
A recursive function uses the result of the previous recursive call. Factorials
are a common example—factorial(n) multiplies all numbers from 1 to n,
and can be defined like this:
factorial(1) is 1
factorial(n) is n * factorial(n - 1)
factorial() is recursive because it uses the result from the same function

applied to its modified argument. Here’s a recursive implementation of
factorial():
// Recursion/Factorial.kt
package recursion
import atomictest.eq
fun factorial(n: Long): Long {
if (n <= 1) return 1
return n * factorial(n - 1)
}
fun main() {
factorial(5) eq 120
factorial(17) eq 355687428096000
}

While this is easy to read, it’s expensive. When calling a function, the
information about that function and its arguments are stored in a call stack.
You see the call stack when an exception is thrown and Kotlin displays the
stack trace:
// Recursion/CallStack.kt
package recursion
fun illegalState() {
// throw IllegalStateException()

}
fun fail() = illegalState()
fun main() {
fail()
}

If you uncomment the line containing the exception, you’ll see the
following:
Exception in thread "main" java.lang.IllegalStateException
at recursion.CallStackKt.illegalState(CallStack.kt:5)
at recursion.CallStackKt.fail(CallStack.kt:8)
at recursion.CallStackKt.main(CallStack.kt:11)

The stack trace displays the state of the call stack at the moment the
exception is thrown. For CallStack.kt, the call stack consists of only three
functions:

The Call Stack

We start in main(), which calls fail(). The fail() call is added to the call
stack along with its arguments. Next, fail() calls illegalState(), which
is also added to the call stack.
When you call a recursive function, each recursive invocation adds a frame
to the call stack. This can easily produce a StackOverflowError, which
means that your call stack became too large and exhausted the available
memory.
Programmers commonly cause StackOverflowErrors by forgetting to
terminate the chain of recursive calls—this is infinite recursion:
// Recursion/InfiniteRecursion.kt
package recursion

fun recurse(i: Int): Int = recurse(i + 1)
fun main() {
// println(recurse(1))
}

If you uncomment the line in main(), you’ll see a stacktrace with many
duplicate calls:
Exception in thread "main" java.lang.StackOverflowError
at recursion.InfiniteRecursionKt.recurse(InfiniteRecursion.kt:4)
at recursion.InfiniteRecursionKt.recurse(InfiniteRecursion.kt:4)
...
at recursion.InfiniteRecursionKt.recurse(InfiniteRecursion.kt:4)

The recursive function keeps calling itself (with a different argument each
time), and fills up the call stack:

Infinite Recursion

Infinite recursion always ends with a StackOverflowError, but you can
produce the same result without infinite recursion, simply by making
enough recursive function calls. For example, let’s sum the integers up to a
given number, recursively defining sum(n) as n + sum(n - 1):
// Recursion/RecursionLimits.kt
package recursion
import atomictest.eq
fun sum(n: Long): Long {
if (n == 0L) return 0
return n + sum(n - 1)
}
fun main() {
sum(2) eq 3
sum(1000) eq 500500

}

// sum(100_000) eq 500050000
(1..100_000L).sum() eq 5000050000

// [1]
// [2]

This recursion quickly becomes expensive. If you uncomment line [1],
you’ll discover that it takes far too long to complete, and all those recursive
calls overflow the stack. If sum(100_000) still works on your machine, try a
bigger number.
Calling sum(100_000) causes a StackOverflowError by adding 100_000
sum() function calls to the call stack. For comparison, line [2] uses the
sum() library function to add the numbers within the range, and this does
not fail.
To avoid a StackOverflowError, you can use an iterative solution instead
of recursion:
// Recursion/Iteration.kt
package iteration
import atomictest.eq
fun sum(n: Long): Long {
var accumulator = 0L
for (i in 1..n) {
accumulator += i
}
return accumulator
}
fun main() {
sum(10000) eq 50005000
sum(100000) eq 5000050000
}

There’s no risk of a StackOverflowError because we only make a single
sum() call and the result is calculated in a for loop. Although the iterative
solution is straightforward, it must use the mutable state variable
accumulator to store the changing value, and functional programming
attempts to avoid mutation.
To prevent call stack overflows, functional languages (including Kotlin) use
a technique called tail recursion. The goal of tail recursion is to reduce the
size of the call stack. In the sum() example, the call stack becomes a single
function call, just as it did in Iteration.kt:

Regular Recursion vs. Tail Recursion

To produce tail recursion, use the tailrec keyword. Under the right
conditions, this converts recursive calls into iteration, eliminating call-stack
overhead. This is a compiler optimization, but it won’t work for just any
recursive call.
To use tailrec successfully, recursion must be the final operation, which
means there can be no extra calculations on the result of the recursive call
before it is returned. For example, if we simply put tailrec before the fun
for sum() in RecursionLimits.kt, Kotlin produces the following warning
messages:
A function is marked as tail-recursive but no tail calls are found
Recursive call is not a tail call
The problem is that n is combined with the result of the recursive sum() call
before returning that result. For tailrec to be successful, the result of the
recursive call must be returned without doing anything to it during the
return. This often requires some work in rearranging the function. For
sum(), a successful tailrec looks like this:
// Recursion/TailRecursiveSum.kt
package tailrecursion
import atomictest.eq
private tailrec fun sum(
n: Long,
accumulator: Long
): Long =

if (n == 0L) accumulator
else sum(n - 1, accumulator + n)
fun sum(n: Long) = sum(n, 0)
fun main() {
sum(2) eq 3
sum(10000) eq 50005000
sum(100000) eq 5000050000
}

By including the accumulator parameter, the addition happens during the
recursive call and you don’t do anything to the result except return it. The
tailrec keyword is now successful, because the code was rewritten to
delegate all activities to the recursive call. In addition, accumulator
becomes an immutable value, eliminating the complaint we had for
Iteration.kt.
factorial() is a common example for demonstrating tail recursion, and is

one of the exercises for this atom. Another example is the Fibonacci
sequence, where each new Fibonacci number is the sum of the previous
two. The first two numbers are 0 and 1, which produces the following
sequence: 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21 ... This can be expressed
recursively:
// Recursion/VerySlowFibonacci.kt
package slowfibonacci
import atomictest.eq
fun fibonacci(n: Long): Long {
return when (n) {
0L -> 0
1L -> 1
else ->
fibonacci(n - 1) + fibonacci(n - 2)
}
}
fun main() {
fibonacci(0) eq 0
fibonacci(22) eq 17711
// Very time-consuming:
// fibonacci(50) eq 12586269025
}

This implementation is terribly inefficient because the previously-calculated
results are not reused. Thus, the number of operations grows exponentially:

Inefficient Computation of Fibonacci Numbers

When computing the 50th Fibonacci number, we first compute the 49th and
48th numbers independently, which means we compute the 48th number
twice. The 46th number is computed as many as 4 times, and so on.
Using tail recursion, the calculations become dramatically more efficient:
// Recursion/Fibonacci.kt
package recursion
import atomictest.eq
fun fibonacci(n: Int): Long {
tailrec fun fibonacci(
n: Int,
current: Long,
next: Long
): Long {
if (n == 0) return current
return fibonacci(
n - 1, next, current + next)
}
return fibonacci(n, 0L, 1L)
}
fun main() {
(0..8).map { fibonacci(it) } eq
"[0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21]"
fibonacci(22) eq 17711
fibonacci(50) eq 12586269025
}

We could avoid the local fibonacci() function using default arguments.
However, default arguments imply that the user can put other values in
those defaults, which produce incorrect results. Because the auxiliary

fibonacci() function is a local function, we don’t expose the additional
parameters, and you can only call fibonacci(n).
main() shows the first eight elements of the Fibonacci sequence, the result

for 22, and finally the 50th Fibonacci number that is now produced very
quickly.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

SECTION V: OBJECT-ORIENTED
PROGRAMMING
… inheritance is a very flexible mechanism. It’s possible and in fact
fairly common to misuse it, but that’s not a reason to distrust it
systematically as seems to have become the fashion.—Bertrand
Meyer

Interfaces
An interface describes the concept of a type. It is a prototype for all
classes that implement the interface.
It describes what a class should do, but not how it should do it. An interface
provides a form, but generally no implementation. It specifies an object’s
actions without detailing how those actions are performed. The interface
describes the mission or goal of an entity, versus a class that contains
implementation details.
One dictionary definition says that an interface is “The place at which
independent and often unrelated systems meet and act on or communicate
with each other.” Thus, an interface is a means of communication between
different parts of a system.
An Application Programming Interface (API) is a set of clearly defined
communication paths between various software components. In objectoriented programming, the API of an object is the set of public members it
uses to interact with other objects.
Code using a particular interface only knows what functions can be called
for that interface. The interface establishes a “protocol” between classes.
(Some object-oriented languages have a keyword called protocol to do the
same thing.)
To create an interface, use the interface keyword instead of the class
keyword. When defining a class that implements an interface, follow the
class name with a : (colon) and the name of the interface:
// Interfaces/Computer.kt
package interfaces
import atomictest.*
interface Computer {
fun prompt(): String
fun calculateAnswer(): Int

}
class Desktop : Computer {
override fun prompt() = "Hello!"
override fun calculateAnswer() = 11
}
class DeepThought : Computer {
override fun prompt() = "Thinking..."
override fun calculateAnswer() = 42
}
class Quantum : Computer {
override fun prompt() = "Probably..."
override fun calculateAnswer() = -1
}
fun main() {
val computers = listOf(
Desktop(), DeepThought(), Quantum()
)
computers.map { it.calculateAnswer() } eq
"[11, 42, -1]"
computers.map { it.prompt() } eq
"[Hello!, Thinking..., Probably...]"
}

Computer declares prompt() and calculateAnswer() but provides no

implementations. A class that implements the interface must provide bodies
for all the declared functions, making those functions concrete. In main()
you see that different implementations of an interface express different
behaviors via their function definitions.
When implementing a member of an interface, you must use the override
modifier. override tells Kotlin you are intentionally using the same name
that appears in the interface (or base class)—that is, you aren’t accidentally
overriding.
An interface can declare properties. These must be overridden in all classes
implementing that interface:
// Interfaces/PlayerInterface.kt
package interfaces
import atomictest.eq
interface Player {
val symbol: Char
}
class Food : Player {
override val symbol = '.'
}

class Robot : Player {
override val symbol get() = 'R'
}
class Wall(override val symbol: Char) : Player
fun main() {
listOf(Food(), Robot(), Wall('|')).map {
it.symbol
} eq "[., R, |]"
}

Each subclass overrides the symbol property in a different way:
Food directly replaces the symbol value.
Robot has a custom getter that returns the value (see Property

Accessors).
Wall overrides symbol inside the constructor argument list (see
Constructors)
An enumeration can implement an interface:
// Interfaces/Hotness.kt
package interfaces
import atomictest.*
interface Hotness {
fun feedback(): String
}
enum class SpiceLevel : Hotness {
Mild {
override fun feedback() =
"It adds flavor!"
},
Medium {
override fun feedback() =
"Is it warm in here?"
},
Hot {
override fun feedback() =
"I'm suddenly sweating a lot."
},
Flaming {
override fun feedback() =
"I'm in pain. I am suffering."
}
}
fun main() {
SpiceLevel.values().map { it.feedback() } eq
"[It adds flavor!, " +
"Is it warm in here?, " +
"I'm suddenly sweating a lot., " +

}

"I'm in pain. I am suffering.]"

The compiler ensures that each enum element provides a definition for
feedback().

SAM Conversions
The Single Abstract Method (SAM) interface comes from Java, where they
call member functions “methods.” Kotlin has a special syntax for defining
SAM interfaces: fun interface. Here we show SAM interfaces with
different parameter lists:
// Interfaces/SAM.kt
package interfaces
fun interface ZeroArg {
fun f(): Int
}
fun interface OneArg {
fun g(n: Int): Int
}
fun interface TwoArg {
fun h(i: Int, j: Int): Int
}

When you say fun interface, the compiler ensures there is only a single
member function.
You can implement a SAM interface in the ordinary verbose way, or by
passing it a lambda; the latter is called a SAM conversion. In a SAM
conversion, the lambda becomes the implementation for the single method
in the interface. Here we show both ways to implement the three interfaces:
// Interfaces/SAMImplementation.kt
package interfaces
import atomictest.eq
class VerboseZero : ZeroArg {
override fun f() = 11
}
val verboseZero = VerboseZero()
val samZero = ZeroArg { 11 }
class VerboseOne : OneArg {
override fun g(n: Int) = n + 47

}
val verboseOne = VerboseOne()
val samOne = OneArg { it + 47 }
class VerboseTwo : TwoArg {
override fun h(i: Int, j: Int) = i + j
}
val verboseTwo = VerboseTwo()
val samTwo =

TwoArg { i, j -> i + j }

fun main() {
verboseZero.f() eq 11
samZero.f() eq 11
verboseOne.g(92) eq 139
samOne.g(92) eq 139
verboseTwo.h(11, 47) eq 58
samTwo.h(11, 47) eq 58
}

Comparing the “verbose” implementations to the “sam” implementations
you can see that SAM conversions produce much more succinct syntax for
a commonly-used idiom, and you aren’t forced to define a class to create a
single object.
You can pass a lambda where a SAM interface is expected, without first
wrapping it into an object:
// Interfaces/SAMConversion.kt
package interfaces
import atomictest.trace
fun interface Action {
fun act()
}
fun delayAction(action: Action) {
trace("Delaying...")
action.act()
}
fun main() {
delayAction { trace("Hey!") }
trace eq "Delaying... Hey!"
}

In main() we pass a lambda instead of an object that implements the
Action interface. Kotlin automatically creates an Action object from this
lambda.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Complex Constructors
For code to work correctly, objects must be properly initialized.
A constructor is a special function that creates a new object. In
Constructors, we saw simple constructors that only initialize their
arguments. Using var or val in the parameter list makes those parameters
properties, accessible from outside the object:
// ComplexConstructors/SimpleConstructor.kt
package complexconstructors
import atomictest.eq
class Alien(val name: String)
fun main() {
val alien = Alien("Pencilvester")
alien.name eq "Pencilvester"
}

In these cases, we don’t write constructor code—Kotlin does it for us. For
more customization, add constructor code in the class body. Code inside the
init section is executed during object creation:
// ComplexConstructors/InitSection.kt
package complexconstructors
import atomictest.eq
private var counter = 0
class Message(text: String) {
private val content: String
init {
counter += 10
content = "[$counter] $text"
}
override fun toString() = content
}
fun main() {
val m1 = Message("Big ba-da boom!")
m1 eq "[10] Big ba-da boom!"
val m2 = Message("Bzzzzt!")
m2 eq "[20] Bzzzzt!"
}

Constructor parameters are accessible inside the init section even if they
aren’t marked as properties using var or val.
Although defined as val, content is not initialized at the point of
definition. In this case, Kotlin ensures that initialization occurs at one (and
only one) point during construction. Either reassigning content or
forgetting to initialize it produces an error message.
A constructor is the combination of its constructor parameter list—
initialized before entering the class body—and the init section(s), executed
during object creation. Kotlin allows multiple init sections, which are
executed in definition order. However, in a large and complex class,
spreading out the init sections may produce maintenance issues for
programmers who are accustomed to a single init section.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Secondary Constructors
When you require several ways to construct an object, named and
default arguments are usually the easiest approach. Sometimes,
however, you must create multiple overloaded constructors.
The constructor is “overloaded” because you’re making different ways to
create objects of the same class. In Kotlin, overloaded constructors are
called secondary constructors. The constructor parameter list (directly after
the class name) combined with property initializations and the init block is
called the primary constructor.
To create a secondary constructor, use the constructor keyword followed
by a parameter list that’s distinct from all other primary and secondary
parameter lists. Within a secondary constructor, the this keyword calls
either the primary constructor or another secondary constructor:
// SecondaryConstructors/WithSecondary.kt
package secondaryconstructors
import atomictest.*
class WithSecondary(i: Int) {
init {
trace("Primary: $i")
}
constructor(c: Char) : this(c - 'A') {
trace("Secondary: '$c'")
}
constructor(s: String) :
this(s.first()) {
// [1]
trace("Secondary: \"$s\"")
}
/* Doesn't compile without a call
to the primary constructor:
constructor(f: Float) {
// [2]
trace("Secondary: $f")
}
*/
}
fun main() {
fun sep() = trace("-".repeat(10))
WithSecondary(1)
sep()
WithSecondary('D')

}

sep()
WithSecondary("Last Constructor")
trace eq """
Primary: 1
---------Primary: 3
Secondary: 'D'
---------Primary: 11
Secondary: 'L'
Secondary: "Last Constructor"
"""

Calling another constructor from a secondary constructor (using this) must
happen before additional constructor logic, because the constructor body
may depend on those other initializations. Thus it precedes the constructor
body.
The argument list determines the constructor to call. WithSecondary(1)
matches the primary constructor, WithSecondary('D') matches the first
secondary constructor, and WithSecondary("Last Constructor") matches
the second secondary constructor. The this() call in [1] matches the first
secondary constructor, and you can see the chain of calls in the output.
The primary constructor must always be called, either directly or through a
call to a secondary constructor. Otherwise, Kotlin generates a compile-time
error, as in [2]. Thus, all common initialization logic that can be shared
between constructors should be placed in the primary constructor.
An init section is not required when using secondary constructors:
// SecondaryConstructors/GardenItem.kt
package secondaryconstructors
import atomictest.eq
import secondaryconstructors.Material.*
enum class Material {
Ceramic, Metal, Plastic
}
class GardenItem(val name: String) {
var material: Material = Plastic
constructor(
name: String, material: Material
) : this(name) {
this.material = material
}
constructor(
material: Material

// [1]
// [2]
// [3]

}

) : this("Strange Thing", material)
// [4]
override fun toString() = "$material $name"

fun main() {
GardenItem("Elf").material eq Plastic
GardenItem("Snowman").name eq "Snowman"
GardenItem("Gazing Ball", Metal) eq
// [5]
"Metal Gazing Ball"
GardenItem(material = Ceramic) eq
"Ceramic Strange Thing"
}

[1] Only the parameters of the primary constructor can be declared as
properties via val or var.
[2] You cannot declare a return type for a secondary constructor.
[3] The material parameter has the same name as a property, so we
disambiguate it using this.
[4] The secondary constructor body is optional (although you must still
include an explicit this() call).
When calling the first secondary constructor in line [5], the property
material is assigned twice. First, the Plastic value is assigned during the
call to the primary constructor (in [2]) and initialization of all the class
properties, then it’s changed to the material parameter at [3].
The GardenItem class can be simplified using default arguments, replacing
the secondary constructors with a single primary constructor.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Inheritance
Inheritance is a mechanism for creating a new class by reusing and
modifying an existing class.
Objects store data in properties and perform actions via member functions.
Each object occupies a unique place in storage so one object’s properties
can have different values from every other object. An object also belongs to
a category called a class, which determines the form (properties and
functions) for its objects. Thus, an object looks like the class that formed it.
Creating and debugging a class can require extensive work. What if you
want to make a class that’s similar to an existing class, but with some
variations? It seems wasteful to build a new class from scratch. Objectoriented languages provide a mechanism for reuse called inheritance.
Inheritance follows the concept of biological inheritance. You say, “I want
to make a new class from an existing class, but with some additions and
modifications.”
The syntax for inheritance is similar to implementing an interface. To
inherit a new class Derived from an existing class Base, use a : (colon):
// Inheritance/BasicInheritance.kt
package inheritance
open class Base
class Derived : Base()

The subsequent atom explains the reason for the parentheses after Base
during inheritance.
The terms base class and derived class (or parent class and child class, or
superclass and subclass) are often used to describe the inheritance
relationship.

The base class must be open. A non-open class doesn’t allow inheritance—
it is closed by default. This differs from most other object-oriented
languages. In Java, for example, a class is automatically inheritable unless
you explicitly forbid inheritance by declaring that class to be final.
Although Kotlin allows it, the final modifier is redundant because every
class is effectively final by default:
// Inheritance/OpenAndFinalClasses.kt
package inheritance
// This class can be inherited:
open class Parent
class Child : Parent()
// Child is not open, so this fails:
// class GrandChild : Child()
// This class can't be inherited:
final class Single
// The same as using 'final':
class AnotherSingle

Kotlin forces you to clarify your intent by using the open keyword to
specify that a class is designed for inheritance.
In the following example, GreatApe is a base class, and has two properties
with fixed values. The derived classes Bonobo, Chimpanzee and BonoboB are
new types that are identical to their parent class:
// Inheritance/GreatApe.kt
package inheritance.ape1
import atomictest.eq
open class GreatApe {
val weight = 100.0
val age = 12
}
open class Bonobo : GreatApe()
class Chimpanzee : GreatApe()
class BonoboB : Bonobo()
fun GreatApe.info() = "wt: $weight age: $age"
fun main() {
GreatApe().info() eq "wt: 100.0 age: 12"
Bonobo().info() eq "wt: 100.0 age: 12"
Chimpanzee().info() eq "wt: 100.0 age: 12"
BonoboB().info() eq "wt: 100.0 age: 12"
}

info() is an extension for GreatApe, so naturally you can call it on a
GreatApe. But notice that you can also call info() on a Bonobo, a
Chimpanzee, or a BonoboB! Even though the latter three are distinct types,
Kotlin happily accepts them as if they were the same type as GreatApe. This
works at any level of inheritance—BonoboB is two inheritance levels away
from GreatApe.

Inheritance guarantees that anything inheriting from GreatApe is a
GreatApe. All code that acts upon objects of the derived classes knows that
GreatApe is at their core, so any functions and properties in GreatApe will
also be available in its child classes.
Inheritance enables you to write a single piece of code (the info()
function) that works not just with one class, but also with every class that
inherits that class. Thus, inheritance creates opportunities for code
simplification and reuse.
GreatApe.kt is a bit too simple because all the classes are identical.

Inheritance gets interesting when you start overriding functions, which
means redefining a function from a base class to do something different in a
derived class.
Let’s look at another version of GreatApe.kt. This time we include member
functions that are modified in the subclasses:
// Inheritance/GreatApe2.kt
package inheritance.ape2
import atomictest.eq
open class GreatApe {
protected var energy = 0
open fun call() = "Hoo!"
open fun eat() {
energy += 10
}
fun climb(x: Int) {
energy -= x
}
fun energyLevel() = "Energy: $energy"
}
class Bonobo : GreatApe() {
override fun call() = "Eep!"
override fun eat() {
// Modify the base-class var:
energy += 10

// Call the base-class version:
super.eat()

}

}
// Add a function:
fun run() = "Bonobo run"

class Chimpanzee : GreatApe() {
// New property:
val additionalEnergy = 20
override fun call() = "Yawp!"
override fun eat() {
energy += additionalEnergy
super.eat()
}
// Add a function:
fun jump() = "Chimp jump"
}
fun talk(ape: GreatApe): String {
// ape.run() // Not an ape function
// ape.jump() // Nor this
ape.eat()
ape.climb(10)
return "${ape.call()} ${ape.energyLevel()}"
}
fun main() {
// Cannot access 'energy':
// GreatApe().energy
talk(GreatApe()) eq "Hoo! Energy: 0"
talk(Bonobo()) eq "Eep! Energy: 10"
talk(Chimpanzee()) eq "Yawp! Energy: 20"
}

Every GreatApe has a call(). They store energy when they eat() and they
expend energy when they climb().
As described in Constraining Visibility, the derived class can’t access the
private members of the base class. Sometimes the creator of the base class
would like to take a particular member and grant access to derived classes
but not to the world in general. That’s what protected does: protected
members are closed to the outside world, but can be accessed or overridden
in subclasses.
If we declare energy as private, it won’t be possible to change it whenever
GreatApe is used, which is good, but we also can’t access it in subclasses.
Making it protected allows us to keep it accessible to subclasses but
invisible to the outside world.

call() is defined the same way in Bonobo and Chimpanzee as it is in
GreatApe. It has no parameters and type inference determines that it returns
a String.

Both Bonobo and Chimpanzee should have different behaviors for call()
than GreatApe, so we want to change their definitions of call(). If you
create an identical function signature in a derived class as in a base class,
you substitute the behavior defined in the base class with your new
behavior. This is called overriding.
When Kotlin sees an identical function signature in the derived class as in
the base class, it decides that you’ve made a mistake, called an accidental
override. If you write a function that has the same name as a function in the
base class, you get an error message saying you forgot the override
keyword. Kotlin assumes you’ve unintentionally chosen the same name,
parameters and return type unless you use the override keyword (which
you first saw in Constructors) to say “yes, I mean to do this.” The override
keyword also helps when reading the code, so you don’t have to compare
signatures to notice the overrides.
Kotlin imposes an additional constraint when overriding functions. Just as
you cannot inherit from a base class unless that base class is open, you
cannot override a function from a base class unless that function is defined
as open in the base class. Note that climb() and energyLevel() are not
open, so they cannot be overridden. Inheritance and overriding cannot be
accomplished in Kotlin without clear intentions.
It’s especially interesting to take a Bonobo or a Chimpanzee and treat it as an
ordinary GreatApe. Inside talk(), call() produces the correct behavior in
each case. talk() somehow knows the exact type of the object and
produces the appropriate variation of call(). This is polymorphism.
Inside talk(), you can only call GreatApe member functions because
talk()’s parameter is a GreatApe. Even though Bonobo defines run() and
Chimpanzee defines jump(), neither function is part of GreatApe.
Often when you override a function, you want to call the base-class version
of that function (for one thing, to reuse the code), as seen in the overrides

for eat(). This produces a conundrum: If you simply call eat(), you call
the same function you’re currently inside (as we’ve seen in Recursion). To
call the base-class version of eat(), use the super keyword, short for
“superclass.”
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Base Class Initialization
When a class inherits another class, Kotlin guarantees that both classes
are properly initialized.
Kotlin creates valid objects by ensuring that constructors are called:
Constructors for member objects.
Constructors for new objects added in the derived class.
The constructor for the base class.
In the Inheritance examples, the base classes didn’t have constructor
parameters. If a base class does have constructor parameters, a derived class
must provide those arguments during construction.
Here’s the first GreatApe example, rewritten with constructor parameters:
// BaseClassInit/GreatApe3.kt
package baseclassinit
import atomictest.eq
open class GreatApe(
val weight: Double,
val age: Int
)
open class Bonobo(weight: Double, age: Int) :
GreatApe(weight, age)
class Chimpanzee(weight: Double, age: Int) :
GreatApe(weight, age)
class BonoboB(weight: Double, age: Int) :
Bonobo(weight, age)
fun GreatApe.info() = "wt: $weight age: $age"
fun main() {
GreatApe(100.0, 12).info() eq
"wt: 100.0 age: 12"
Bonobo(110.0, 13).info() eq
"wt: 110.0 age: 13"
Chimpanzee(120.0, 14).info() eq
"wt: 120.0 age: 14"
BonoboB(130.0, 15).info() eq

}

"wt: 130.0 age: 15"

When inheriting from GreatApe, you must pass the necessary constructor
arguments to the GreatApe base class, otherwise you’ll get a compile-time
error message.
After Kotlin creates memory for your object, it calls the base-class
constructor first, then the constructor for the next-derived class, and so on
until it reaches the most-derived constructor. This way, all constructor calls
can rely on the validity of all the sub-objects created before them. Indeed,
those are the only things it knows about; a Bonobo knows it inherits from
GreatApe and the Bonobo constructor can call functions in the GreatApe
class, but a GreatApe cannot know whether it’s a Bonobo or a Chimpanzee,
or call functions specific to those subclasses.
When inheriting from a class you must provide arguments to the base-class
constructor after the base class name. This calls the base-class constructor
during object construction:
// BaseClassInit/NoArgConstructor.kt
package baseclassinit
open class SuperClass1(val i: Int)
class SubClass1(i: Int) : SuperClass1(i)
open class SuperClass2
class SubClass2 : SuperClass2()

When there are no base-class constructor parameters, Kotlin still requires
empty parentheses after the base class name, to call that constructor without
arguments.
If there are secondary constructors in the base class you may call one of
those instead:
// BaseClassInit/House.kt
package baseclassinit
import atomictest.eq
open class House(
val address: String,
val state: String,
val zip: String
) {
constructor(fullAddress: String) :

}

this(fullAddress.substringBefore(", "),
fullAddress.substringAfter(", ")
.substringBefore(" "),
fullAddress.substringAfterLast(" "))
val fullAddress: String
get() = "$address, $state $zip"

class VacationHouse(
address: String,
state: String,
zip: String,
val startMonth: String,
val endMonth: String
) : House(address, state, zip) {
override fun toString() =
"Vacation house at $fullAddress " +
"from $startMonth to $endMonth"
}
class TreeHouse(
val name: String
) : House("Tree Street, TR 00000") {
override fun toString() =
"$name tree house at $fullAddress"
}
fun main() {
val vacationHouse = VacationHouse(
address = "8 Target St.",
state = "KS",
zip = "66632",
startMonth = "May",
endMonth = "September")
vacationHouse eq
"Vacation house at 8 Target St., " +
"KS 66632 from May to September"
TreeHouse("Oak") eq
"Oak tree house at Tree Street, TR 00000"
}

When VacationHouse inherits from House it passes the appropriate
arguments to the primary House constructor. It also adds its own parameters
startMonth and endMonth—you aren’t limited by the number, type or order
of the parameters in the base class. Your only responsibility is to provide
the correct arguments in the call to the base-class constructor.
You call an overloaded base-class constructor by passing the matching
constructor arguments in the base-class constructor call. You see this in the
definitions of VacationHouse and TreeHouse. Each calls a different baseclass constructor.

Inside a secondary constructor of a derived class you can either call the
base-class constructor or a different derived-class constructor:
// BaseClassInit/OtherConstructors.kt
package baseclassinit
import atomictest.eq
open class Base(val i: Int)
class Derived : Base {
constructor(i: Int) : super(i)
constructor() : this(9)
}
fun main() {
val d1 = Derived(11)
d1.i eq 11
val d2 = Derived()
d2.i eq 9
}

To call the base-class constructor, use the super keyword, passing the
constructor arguments as if it is a function call. Use this to call another
constructor of the same class.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Abstract Classes
An abstract class is like an ordinary class except one or more
functions or properties is incomplete: a function lacks a definition or a
property is declared without initialization. An interface is like an
abstract class but without state.
You must use the abstract modifier to mark class members that have
missing definitions. A class containing abstract functions or properties
must also be marked abstract. Try removing any of the abstract
modifiers below and see what message you get:
// Abstract/AbstractKeyword.kt
package abstractclasses
abstract class WithProperty {
abstract val x: Int
}
abstract class WithFunctions {
abstract fun f(): Int
abstract fun g(n: Double)
}

WithProperty declares x with no initialization value (a declaration

describes something without providing a definition to create storage for a
value or code for a function). If there isn’t an initializer, Kotlin requires
references to be abstract, and expects the abstract modifier on the class.
Without an initializer, Kotlin cannot infer the type, so it also requires type
information for an abstract reference.
WithFunctions declares f() and g() but provides no function definitions,
again forcing you to add the abstract modifier to the functions and the

containing class. If you don’t give a return type for the function, as with
g(), Kotlin assumes it returns Unit.

Abstract functions and properties must somehow exist (be made concrete)
in the class that you ultimately create from the abstract class.

All functions and properties declared in an interface are abstract by default,
which makes an interface similar to an abstract class. When an interface
contains a function or property declaration, the abstract modifier is
redundant and can be removed. These two interfaces are equivalent:
// Abstract/Redundant.kt
package abstractclasses
interface Redundant {
abstract val x: Int
abstract fun f(): Int
abstract fun g(n: Double)
}
interface Removed {
val x: Int
fun f(): Int
fun g(n: Double)
}

The difference between interfaces and abstract classes is that an abstract
class can contain state, while an interface cannot. State is the data stored
inside properties. In the following, the state of IntList consists of the
values stored in the properties name and list.
// Abstract/StateOfAClass.kt
package abstractstate
import atomictest.eq
class IntList(val name: String) {
val list = mutableListOf<Int>()
}
fun main() {
val ints = IntList("numbers")
ints.name eq "numbers"
ints.list += 7
ints.list eq listOf(7)
}

An interface may declare properties, but actual data is only stored in classes
that implement the interface. An interface isn’t allowed to store values in its
properties:
// Abstract/NoStateInInterfaces.kt
package abstractclasses
interface IntList {
val name: String
// Doesn't compile:
// val list = listOf(0)
}

Both interfaces and abstract classes can contain functions with
implementations. You can call other abstract members from such
functions:
// Abstract/Implementations.kt
package abstractclasses
import atomictest.eq
interface Parent {
val ch: Char
fun f(): Int
fun g() = "ch = $ch; f() = ${f()}"
}
class Actual(
override val ch: Char
): Parent {
override fun f() = 17
}
class Other : Parent {
override val ch: Char
get() = 'B'
override fun f() = 34
}

// [1]
// [2]

// [3]
// [4]

fun main() {
Actual('A').g() eq "ch = A; f() = 17" // [5]
Other().g() eq "ch = B; f() = 34"
// [6]
}

Parent declares an abstract property ch and an abstract function f() that

must be overridden in any implementing classes. Lines [1]-[4] show
different implementations of these members in subclasses.

Parent.g() uses abstract members that have no definitions at the point
where g() is defined. Interfaces and abstract classes guarantee that all

abstract properties and functions are implemented before any objects can be
created—and you can’t call a member function unless you’ve got an object.
Lines [5] and [6] call different implementations of ch and f().
Because an interface can contain function implementations, it can also
contain custom property accessors if the corresponding property doesn’t
change state:
// Abstract/PropertyAccessor.kt
package abstractclasses
import atomictest.eq
interface PropertyAccessor {

}

val a: Int
get() = 11

class Impl : PropertyAccessor
fun main() {
Impl().a eq 11
}

You might wonder why we need interfaces when abstract classes are more
powerful. To understand the importance of “a class without state,” let’s look
at the concept of multiple inheritance, which Kotlin doesn’t support. In
Kotlin, a class can only inherit from a single base class:
// Abstract/NoMultipleInheritance.kt
package multipleinheritance1
open class Animal
open class Mammal : Animal()
open class AquaticAnimal : Animal()
// More than one base class doesn't compile:
// class Dolphin : Mammal(), AquaticAnimal()

Trying to compile the commented code produces an error: Only one class
may appear in a supertype list.
Java works the same way. The original Java designers decided that C++
multiple inheritance was a bad idea. The main complexity and
dissatisfaction at that time came from multiple state inheritance. The rules
managing inheritance of multiple states are complicated and can easily
cause confusion and surprising behavior. Java added an elegant solution to
this problem by introducing interfaces, which can’t contain state. Java
forbids multiple state inheritance, but allows multiple interface inheritance,
and Kotlin follows this design:
// Abstract/MultipleInterfaceInheritance.kt
package multipleinheritance2
interface Animal
interface Mammal: Animal
interface AquaticAnimal: Animal
class Dolphin : Mammal, AquaticAnimal

Note that, just like classes, interfaces can inherit from each other.

When inheriting from several interfaces, it’s possible to simultaneously
override two or more functions with the same signature (the name
combined with the parameters and return type). If function or property
signatures collide, you must resolve the collisions by hand, as seen in class
C:
// Abstract/InterfaceCollision.kt
package collision
import atomictest.eq
interface A {
fun f() = 1
fun g() = "A.g"
val n: Double
get() = 1.1
}
interface B {
fun f() = 2
fun g() = "B.g"
val n: Double
get() = 2.2
}
class C : A, B {
override fun f() = 0
override fun g() = super<A>.g()
override val n: Double
get() = super<A>.n + super<B>.n
}
fun main() {
val c = C()
c.f() eq 0
c.g() eq "A.g"
c.n eq 3.3
}

The functions f() and g() and the property n have identical signatures in
interfaces A and B, so Kotlin doesn’t know what to do and produces an error
message if you don’t resolve the issue (try individually commenting the
definitions in C). Member functions and properties can be overridden with
new definitions as in f(), but functions can also access the base versions of
themselves using the super keyword, specifying the base class in angle
brackets, as in the definition of C.g() and C.n.
Collisions where the identifier is the same but the type is different are not
allowed in Kotlin and cannot be resolved.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Upcasting
Taking an object reference and treating it as a reference to its base type
is called upcasting. The term upcast refers to the way inheritance
hierarchies are traditionally represented with the base class at the top
and derived classes fanning out below.
Inheriting and adding new member functions is the practice in Smalltalk,
one of the first successful object-oriented languages. In Smalltalk,
everything is an object and the only way to create a class is to inherit from
an existing class, often adding new member functions. Smalltalk heavily
influenced Java, which also requires everything to be an object.
Kotlin frees us from these constraints. We have stand-alone functions so
everything doesn’t need to be contained within classes. Extension functions
allow us to add functionality without inheritance. Indeed, requiring the open
keyword for inheritance makes it a very conscious and intentional choice,
not something to use all the time.
More precisely, it narrows inheritance to a very specific use, an abstraction
that allows us to write code that can be reused across multiple classes
within a single hierarchy. The Polymorphism atom explores these
mechanics, but first you must understand upcasting.
Consider some Shapes that can be drawn and erased:
// Upcasting/Shapes.kt
package upcasting
interface Shape {
fun draw(): String
fun erase(): String
}
class Circle : Shape {
override fun draw() = "Circle.draw"
override fun erase() = "Circle.erase"
}

class Square : Shape {
override fun draw() = "Square.draw"
override fun erase() = "Square.erase"
fun color() = "Square.color"
}
class Triangle : Shape {
override fun draw() = "Triangle.draw"
override fun erase() = "Triangle.erase"
fun rotate() = "Triangle.rotate"
}

The show() function accepts any Shape:
// Upcasting/Drawing.kt
package upcasting
import atomictest.*
fun show(shape: Shape) {
trace("Show: ${shape.draw()}")
}
fun main() {
listOf(Circle(), Square(), Triangle())
.forEach(::show)
trace eq """
Show: Circle.draw
Show: Square.draw
Show: Triangle.draw
"""
}

In main(), show() is called with three different types: Circle, Square, and
Triangle. The show() parameter is of the base class Shape, so show()
accepts all three types. Each of those types is treated as a basic Shape—we
say that the specific types are upcast to the basic type.
We typically draw a diagram for this hierarchy with the base class at the
top:

Shape Hierarchy

When we pass a Circle, Square, or Triangle as an argument of type Shape
in show(), we cast up this inheritance hierarchy. In the process of upcasting,
we lose the specific information about whether an object is of type Circle,
Square, or Triangle. In each case, it becomes nothing more than a Shape
object.
Treating a specific type as a more general type is the entire point of
inheritance. The mechanics of inheritance exist solely to fulfill the goal of
upcasting to the base type. Because of this abstraction (“everything is a
Shape”), we can write a single show() function instead of writing one for
every type of element. Upcasting is a way to reuse code for objects.
Indeed, in virtually every case where there’s inheritance without upcasting,
inheritance is being misused—it’s unnecessary, and it makes the code
needlessly complicated. This misuse is the reason for the maxim:
Prefer composition to inheritance.
If the point of inheritance is the ability to substitute a derived type for a
base type, what happens to the extra member functions: color() in Square
and rotate() in Triangle?
Substitutability, also called the Liskov Substitution Principle, says that, after
upcasting, the derived type can be treated exactly like the base type—no
more and no less. This means that any member functions added to the
derived class are, in effect, “trimmed off.” They still exist, but because they
are not part of the base-class interface, they are unavailable within show():
// Upcasting/TrimmedMembers.kt
package upcasting
import atomictest.*
fun trim(shape: Shape) {
trace(shape.draw())
trace(shape.erase())
// Doesn't compile:
// shape.color()
// [1]
// shape.rotate()
// [2]
}
fun main() {
trim(Square())
trim(Triangle())

}

trace eq """
Square.draw
Square.erase
Triangle.draw
Triangle.erase
"""

You can’t call color() in line [1] because the Square instance was upcast to
a Shape, and you can’t call rotate() in line [2] because the Triangle
instance is also upcast to a Shape. The only member functions available are
the ones that are common to all Shapes—those defined in the base type
Shape.
Note that the same applies when you directly assign a subtype of Shape to a
general Shape. The specified type determines the available members:
// Upcasting/Assignment.kt
import upcasting.*
fun main() {
val shape1: Shape = Square()
val shape2: Shape = Triangle()
// Doesn't compile:
// shape1.color()
// shape2.rotate()
}

After an upcast, you can only call members of the base type.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Polymorphism
Polymorphism is an ancient Greek term meaning “many forms.” In
programming, polymorphism means an object or its members have
multiple implementations.
Consider a simple hierarchy of Pet types. The Pet class says that all Pets
can speak(). Dog and Cat override the speak() member function:
// Polymorphism/Pet.kt
package polymorphism
import atomictest.eq
open class Pet {
open fun speak() = "Pet"
}
class Dog : Pet() {
override fun speak() = "Bark!"
}
class Cat : Pet() {
override fun speak() = "Meow"
}
fun talk(pet: Pet) = pet.speak()
fun main() {
talk(Dog()) eq "Bark!"
talk(Cat()) eq "Meow"
}

// [1]
// [2]

Notice the talk() function parameter. When passing a Dog or a Cat to
talk(), the specific type is forgotten and becomes a plain Pet—both Dogs
and Cats are upcast to Pet. The objects are now treated as plain Pets so
shouldn’t the output for both lines [1] and [2] be "Pet"?
talk() doesn’t know the exact type of Pet it receives. Despite that, when
you call speak() through a reference to the base-class Pet, the correct

subclass implementation is called, and you get the desired behavior.

Polymorphism occurs when a parent class reference contains a child class
instance. When you call a member on that parent class reference,
polymorphism produces the correct overridden member from the child
class.
Connecting a function call to a function body is called binding. Ordinarily,
you don’t think much about binding because it happens statically, at
compile time. With polymorphism, the same operation must behave
differently for different types—but the compiler cannot know in advance
which function body to use. The function body must be determined
dynamically, at runtime, using dynamic binding. Dynamic binding is also
called late binding or dynamic dispatch. Only at runtime can Kotlin
determine the exact speak() function to call. Thus we say that the binding
for the polymorphic call pet.speak() occurs dynamically.
Consider a fantasy game. Each Character in the game has a name and can
play(). We combine Fighter and Magician to build specific characters:
// Polymorphism/FantasyGame.kt
package polymorphism
import atomictest.*
abstract class Character(val name: String) {
abstract fun play(): String
}
interface Fighter {
fun fight() = "Fight!"
}
interface Magician {
fun doMagic() = "Magic!"
}
class Warrior :
Character("Warrior"), Fighter {
override fun play() = fight()
}
open class Elf(name: String = "Elf") :
Character(name), Magician {
override fun play() = doMagic()
}
class FightingElf :
Elf("FightingElf"), Fighter {
override fun play() =
super.play() + fight()
}

fun Character.playTurn() =
trace(name + ": " + play())

// [1]
// [2]

fun main() {
val characters: List<Character> = listOf(
Warrior(), Elf(), FightingElf()
)
characters.forEach { it.playTurn() } // [3]
trace eq """
Warrior: Fight!
Elf: Magic!
FightingElf: Magic!Fight!
"""
}

In main(), each object is upcast to Character as it is placed into the List.
The trace shows that calling playTurn() on each Character in the List
produces different output.
playTurn() is an extension function on the base type Character. When

called in line [3], it is statically bound, which means the exact function to
be called is determined at compile time. In line [3], the compiler determines
that there is only one playTurn() function implementation—the one
defined on line [1].
When the compiler analyzes the play() function call on line [2], it doesn’t
know which function implementation to use. If the Character is an Elf, it
must call Elf’s play(). If the Character is a FightingElf, it must call
FightingElf’s play(). It might also need to call a function from an as-yetundefined subclass. The function binding differs from invocation to
invocation. At compile time, the only certainty is that play() on line [2] is
a member function of one of the Character subclasses. The specific
subclass can only be known at runtime, based on the actual Character type.
Dynamic binding isn’t free. The additional logic that determines the
runtime type slightly impacts performance compared to static binding. To
force clarity, Kotlin defaults to closed classes and member functions. To
inherit and override, you must be explicit.
A language feature such as the when statement can be learned in isolation.
Polymorphism cannot—it only works in concert, as part of the larger

picture of class relationships. To use object-oriented techniques effectively,
you must expand your perspective to include not just members of an
individual class, but also the commonality among classes and their
relationships with each other.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Composition
One of the most compelling arguments for object-oriented
programming is code reuse.
You may first think of “reuse” as “copying code.” Copying seems like an
easy solution, but it doesn’t work very well. As time passes, your needs
evolve. Applying changes to code that’s been copied is a maintenance
nightmare. Did you find all the copies? Did you make the changes the same
way for each copy? Reused code can be changed in just one place.
In object-oriented programming you reuse code by creating new classes, but
instead of creating them from scratch, you use existing classes that someone
has already built and debugged. The trick is to use the classes without
soiling the existing code.
Inheritance is one way to achieve this. Inheritance creates a new class as a
type of an existing class. You add code to the form of the existing class
without modifying the original. Inheritance is a cornerstone of objectoriented programming.
You can also choose a more straightforward approach, by creating objects
of existing classes inside your new class. This is called composition,
because the new class is composed of objects of existing classes. You’re
reusing the functionality of the code, not its form.
Composition is used frequently in this book. Composition is often
overlooked because it seems so simple—you just put an object inside a
class.
Composition is a has-a relationship. “A house is a building and has a
kitchen” can be expressed like this:
// Composition/House1.kt
package composition1

interface Building
interface Kitchen
interface House: Building {
val kitchen: Kitchen
}

Inheritance describes an is-a relationship, and it’s often helpful to read the
description aloud: “A house is a building.” That sounds right, doesn’t it?
When the is-a relationship makes sense, inheritance usually makes sense.
If your house has two kitchens, composition yields an easy solution:
// Composition/House2.kt
package composition2
interface Building
interface Kitchen
interface House: Building {
val kitchen1: Kitchen
val kitchen2: Kitchen
}

To allow any number of kitchens, use composition with a collection:
// Composition/House3.kt
package composition3
interface Building
interface Kitchen
interface House: Building {
val kitchens: List<Kitchen>
}

We spend time and effort understanding inheritance because it’s more
complex, and that complexity might give the impression that it’s somehow
more important. On the contrary:
Prefer composition to inheritance.
Composition produces simpler designs and implementations. This doesn’t
mean you should avoid inheritance. It’s just that we tend to get bound up in
more complicated relationships. The maxim prefer composition to
inheritance is a reminder to step back, look at your design, and wonder

whether you can simplify it with composition. The ultimate goal is to
properly apply your tools and produce a good design.
Composition appears trivial, but is powerful. When a class grows and
becomes responsible for different unrelated things, composition helps pull
them apart. Use composition to simplify the complicated logic of a class.

Choosing Between Composition and Inheritance
Both composition and inheritance put subobjects inside your new class—
composition has explicit subobjects while inheritance has implicit
subjobjects. When do you choose one over the other?
Composition provides the functionality of an existing class, but not its
interface. You embed an object to use its features in your new class, but the
user sees the interface you’ve defined for that new class rather than the
interface of the embedded object. To hide the object completely, embed it
privately:
// Composition/Embedding.kt
package composition
class Features {
fun f1() = "feature1"
fun f2() = "feature2"
}
class Form {
private val features = Features()
fun operation1() =
features.f2() + features.f1()
fun operation2() =
features.f1() + features.f2()
}

The Features class provides implementations for the operations of Form,
but the client programmer who uses Form has no access to features—
indeed, the user is effectively unaware of how Form is implemented. This
means that if you find a better way to implement Form, you can remove
features and change to the new approach without any impact on code that
calls Form.
If Form inherited Features, the client programmer could expect to upcast
Form to Features. The inheritance relationship is then part of Form—the

connection is explicit. If you change this, you’ll break code that relies upon
that connection.
Sometimes it makes sense to allow the class user to directly access the
composition of your new class; that is, to make the member objects public.
This is relatively safe, assuming the member objects use appropriate
implementation hiding. For some systems, this approach can make the
interface easier to understand. Consider a Car:
// Composition/Car.kt
package composition
import atomictest.*
class Engine {
fun start() = trace("Engine start")
fun stop() = trace("Engine stop")
}
class Wheel {
fun inflate(psi: Int) =
trace("Wheel inflate($psi)")
}
class Window(val side: String) {
fun rollUp() =
trace("$side Window roll up")
fun rollDown() =
trace("$side Window roll down")
}
class Door(val side: String) {
val window = Window(side)
fun open() = trace("$side Door open")
fun close() = trace("$side Door close")
}
class Car {
val engine = Engine()
val wheel = List(4) { Wheel() }
// Two door:
val leftDoor = Door("left")
val rightDoor = Door("right")
}
fun main() {
val car = Car()
car.leftDoor.open()
car.rightDoor.window.rollUp()
car.wheel[0].inflate(72)
car.engine.start()
trace eq """
left Door open
right Window roll up
Wheel inflate(72)
Engine start

}

"""

The composition of a Car is part of the analysis of the problem, and not
simply part of the underlying implementation. This assists the client
programmer’s understanding of how to use the class and requires less code
complexity for the creator of the class.
When you inherit, you create a custom version of an existing class. This
takes a general-purpose class and specializes it for a particular need. In this
example, it would make no sense to compose a Car using an object of a
Vehicle class—a Car doesn’t contain a Vehicle, it is a Vehicle. The is-a
relationship is expressed with inheritance, and the has-a relationship is
expressed with composition.
The cleverness of polymorphism can make it can seem that everything
ought to be inherited. This will burden your designs. In fact, if you choose
inheritance first when you’re using an existing class to build a new class,
things can become needlessly complicated. A better approach is to try
composition first, especially when it’s not obvious which approach works
best.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Inheritance & Extensions
Inheritance is sometimes used to add functions to a class as a way to
reuse it for a new purpose. This can lead to code that is difficult to
understand and maintain.
Suppose someone has created a Heater class along with functions that act
upon a Heater:
// InheritanceExtensions/Heater.kt
package inheritanceextensions
import atomictest.eq
open class Heater {
fun heat(temperature: Int) =
"heating to $temperature"
}
fun warm(heater: Heater) {
heater.heat(70) eq "heating to 70"
}

For the sake of argument, imagine that Heater is far more complex than
this, and that there are many adjunct functions such as warm(). We don’t
want to modify this library—we want to reuse it as-is.
If what we actually want is an HVAC (Heating, Ventilation and Air
Conditioning) system, we can inherit Heater and add a cool() function.
The existing warm() function, and all other functions that act upon a
Heater, still work with our new HVAC type—which would not be true if we
had used composition:
// InheritanceExtensions/InheritAdd.kt
package inheritanceextensions
import atomictest.eq
class HVAC : Heater() {
fun cool(temperature: Int) =
"cooling to $temperature"
}
fun warmAndCool(hvac: HVAC) {
hvac.heat(70) eq "heating to 70"

}

hvac.cool(60) eq "cooling to 60"

fun main() {
val heater = Heater()
val hvac = HVAC()
warm(heater)
warm(hvac)
warmAndCool(hvac)
}

This seems practical: Heater didn’t do everything we wanted, so we
inherited HVAC from Heater and tacked on another function.
As you saw in Upcasting, object-oriented languages have a mechanism to
deal with member functions added during inheritance: the added functions
are trimmed off during upcasting and are unavailable to the base class. This
is the Liskov Substitution Principle, aka “Substitutability,” which says
functions that accept a base class must be able to use objects of derived
classes without knowing it. Substitutability is why warm() still works on an
HVAC.
Although modern OO programming allows the addition of functions during
inheritance, this can be a “code smell”—it appears to be reasonable and
expedient but can lead you into trouble. Just because it seems to work
doesn’t mean it’s a good idea. In particular, it might negatively impact a
later maintainer of the code (which might be you). This kind of problem is
called technical debt.
Adding functions during inheritance can be useful when the new class is
rigorously treated as a base class throughout your system, ignoring the fact
that it has its own bases. In Type Checking you’ll see more examples where
adding functions during inheritance can be a viable technique.
What we really wanted when creating the HVAC class was a Heater class
with an added cool() function so it works with warmAndCool(). This is
exactly what an extension function does, without inheritance:
// InheritanceExtensions/ExtensionFuncs.kt
package inheritanceextensions2
import inheritanceextensions.Heater
import atomictest.eq
fun Heater.cool(temperature: Int) =

"cooling to $temperature"
fun warmAndCool(heater: Heater) {
heater.heat(70) eq "heating to 70"
heater.cool(60) eq "cooling to 60"
}
fun main() {
val heater = Heater()
warmAndCool(heater)
}

Instead of inheriting to extend the base class interface, extension functions
extend the base class interface directly, without inheritance.
If we had control over the Heater library, we could design it differently, to
be more flexible:
// InheritanceExtensions/TemperatureDelta.kt
package inheritanceextensions
import atomictest.*
class TemperatureDelta(
val current: Double,
val target: Double
)
fun TemperatureDelta.heat() {
if (current < target)
trace("heating to $target")
}
fun TemperatureDelta.cool() {
if (current > target)
trace("cooling to $target")
}
fun adjust(deltaT: TemperatureDelta) {
deltaT.heat()
deltaT.cool()
}
fun main() {
adjust(TemperatureDelta(60.0, 70.0))
adjust(TemperatureDelta(80.0, 60.0))
trace eq """
heating to 70.0
cooling to 60.0
"""
}

In this approach, we control the temperature by choosing among multiple
strategies. We could also have made heat() and cool() member functions
instead of extension functions.

Interface by Convention
An extension function can be thought of as creating an interface containing
a single function:
// InheritanceExtensions/Convention.kt
package inheritanceextensions
class X
fun X.f() {}
class Y
fun Y.f() {}
fun callF(x: X) = x.f()
fun callF(y: Y) = y.f()
fun main() {
val x = X()
val y = Y()
x.f()
y.f()
callF(x)
callF(y)
}

Both X and Y now appear to have a member function called f(), but we
don’t get polymorphic behavior so we must overload callF() to make it
work for both types.
This “interface by convention” is used extensively in the Kotlin libraries,
especially when dealing with collections. Although these are predominantly
Java collections, the Kotlin library turns them into functional-style
collections by adding a large number of extension functions. For example,
on virtually any collection-like object, you can expect to find map() and
reduce(), among many others. Because the programmer comes to expect
this convention, it makes programming easier.
The Kotlin standard library Sequence interface contains a single member
function. The other Sequence functions are all extensions—there are well
over one hundred. Initially, this approach was used for compatibility with
Java collections, but now it’s part of the Kotlin philosophy: Create a simple
interface containing only the methods that define its essence, then create all
auxiliary operations as extensions.

The Adapter Pattern
A library often defines a type and provides functions that accept parameters
of that type and/or return that type:
// InheritanceExtensions/UsefulLibrary.kt
package usefullibrary
interface LibType {
fun f1()
fun f2()
}
fun utility1(lt: LibType) {
lt.f1()
lt.f2()
}
fun utility2(lt: LibType) {
lt.f2()
lt.f1()
}

To use this library, you must somehow convert your existing class to
LibType. Here, we inherit from an existing MyClass to produce
MyClassAdaptedForLib, which implements LibType and can thus be passed
to the functions in UsefulLibrary.kt:
// InheritanceExtensions/Adapter.kt
package inheritanceextensions
import usefullibrary.*
import atomictest.*
open class MyClass {
fun g() = trace("g()")
fun h() = trace("h()")
}
fun useMyClass(mc: MyClass) {
mc.g()
mc.h()
}
class MyClassAdaptedForLib :
MyClass(), LibType {
override fun f1() = h()
override fun f2() = g()
}
fun main() {
val mc = MyClassAdaptedForLib()
utility1(mc)
utility2(mc)
useMyClass(mc)

}

trace eq "h() g() g() h() g() h()"

Although this does extend a class during inheritance, the new member
functions are used only for the purpose of adapting to UsefulLibrary. Note
that everywhere else, objects of MyClassAdaptedForLib can be treated as
MyClass objects, as in the call to useMyClass(). There’s no code that uses
the extended MyClassAdaptedForLib where users of the base class must
know about the derived class.
Adapter.kt relies on MyClass being open for inheritance. What if you don’t
control MyClass and it’s not open? Fortunately, adapters can also be built
using composition. Here, we add a MyClass field inside
MyClassAdaptedForLib:
// InheritanceExtensions/ComposeAdapter.kt
package inheritanceextensions2
import usefullibrary.*
import atomictest.*
class MyClass { // Not open
fun g() = trace("g()")
fun h() = trace("h()")
}
fun useMyClass(mc: MyClass) {
mc.g()
mc.h()
}
class MyClassAdaptedForLib : LibType {
val field = MyClass()
override fun f1() = field.h()
override fun f2() = field.g()
}
fun main() {
val mc = MyClassAdaptedForLib()
utility1(mc)
utility2(mc)
useMyClass(mc.field)
trace eq "h() g() g() h() g() h()"
}

This is not quite as clean as Adapter.kt—you must explicitly access the
MyClass object as seen in the call to useMyClass(mc.field). But it still
handily solves the problem of adapting to a library.

Extension functions seem like they might be very useful for creating
adapters. Unfortunately, you cannot implement an interface by collecting
extension functions.

Members versus Extensions
There are cases where you are forced to use member functions rather than
extensions. If a function must access a private member, you have no
choice but to make it a member function:
// InheritanceExtensions/PrivateAccess.kt
package inheritanceextensions
import atomictest.eq
class Z(var i: Int = 0) {
private var j = 0
fun increment() {
i++
j++
}
}
fun Z.decrement() {
i-// j -- // Cannot access
}

The member function increment() can manipulate j, but the extension
function decrement() doesn’t have access to j because j is private.
The most significant limitation to extension functions is that they cannot be
overridden:
// InheritanceExtensions/NoExtOverride.kt
package inheritanceextensions
import atomictest.*
open class Base {
open fun f() = "Base.f()"
}
class Derived : Base() {
override fun f() = "Derived.f()"
}
fun Base.g() = "Base.g()"
fun Derived.g() = "Derived.g()"
fun useBase(b: Base) {
trace("Received ${b::class.simpleName}")
trace(b.f())
trace(b.g())

}
fun main() {
useBase(Base())
useBase(Derived())
trace eq """
Received Base
Base.f()
Base.g()
Received Derived
Derived.f()
Base.g()
"""
}

The trace output shows that polymorphism works with the member
function f() but not the extension function g().
When a function doesn’t need overriding and you have adequate access to
the members of a class, you can define it as either a member function or an
extension function—a stylistic choice that should maximize code clarity.
A member function reflects the essence of a type; you can’t imagine the
type without that function. Extension functions indicate “auxiliary” or
“convenience” operations that support or utilize the type, but are not
necessarily essential to that type’s existence. Including auxiliary functions
inside a type makes it harder to reason about, while defining some functions
as extensions keeps the type clean and simple.
Consider a Device interface. The model and productionYear properties are
intrinsic to Device because they describe key features. Functions like
overpriced() and outdated() can be defined either as members of the
interface or as extension functions. Here they are member functions:
// InheritanceExtensions/DeviceMembers.kt
package inheritanceextensions1
import atomictest.eq
interface Device {
val model: String
val productionYear: Int
fun overpriced() = model.startsWith("i")
fun outdated() = productionYear < 2050
}
class MyDevice(
override val model: String,
override val productionYear: Int
): Device

fun main() {
val gadget: Device =
MyDevice("my first phone", 2000)
gadget.outdated() eq true
gadget.overpriced() eq false
}

If we assume overpriced() and outdated() will not be overridden in
subclasses, they can be defined as extensions:
// InheritanceExtensions/DeviceExtensions.kt
package inheritanceextensions2
import atomictest.eq
interface Device {
val model: String
val productionYear: Int
}
fun Device.overpriced() =
model.startsWith("i")
fun Device.outdated() =
productionYear < 2050
class MyDevice(
override val model: String,
override val productionYear: Int
): Device
fun main() {
val gadget: Device =
MyDevice("my first phone", 2000)
gadget.outdated() eq true
gadget.overpriced() eq false
}

Interfaces that only contain descriptive members are easier to comprehend
and reason about, so the Device interface in the second example is probably
a better choice. Ultimately, however, it’s a design decision.
Languages like C++ and Java allow inheritance unless you specifically
disallow it. Kotlin assumes that you won’t be using inheritance—it actively
prevents inheritance and polymorphism unless they are intentionally
allowed using the open keyword. This provides insight into Kotlin’s
orientation:

Often, functions are all you need. Sometimes objects are very useful.
Objects are one tool among many, but they’re not for everything.
If you’re pondering how to use inheritance in a particular situation, consider
whether you need inheritance at all, and apply the maxim Prefer extension
functions and composition to inheritance (modified from the book Design
Patterns).
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Class Delegation
Both composition and inheritance place subobjects inside your new
class. With composition the subobject is explicit and with inheritance
it is implicit.
Composition uses the functionality of an embedded object but does not
expose its interface. For a class to reuse an existing implementation and
implement its interface, you have two options: inheritance and class
delegation.
Class delegation is midway between inheritance and composition. Like
composition, you place a member object in the class you’re building. Like
inheritance, class delegation exposes the interface of the subobject. In
addition, you can upcast to the member type. For code reuse, class
delegation makes composition as powerful as inheritance.
How would you achieve this without language support? Here, a spaceship
needs a control module:
// ClassDelegation/SpaceShipControls.kt
package classdelegation
interface Controls {
fun up(velocity: Int): String
fun down(velocity: Int): String
fun left(velocity: Int): String
fun right(velocity: Int): String
fun forward(velocity: Int): String
fun back(velocity: Int): String
fun turboBoost(): String
}
class SpaceShipControls : Controls {
override fun up(velocity: Int) =
"up $velocity"
override fun down(velocity: Int) =
"down $velocity"
override fun left(velocity: Int) =
"left $velocity"
override fun right(velocity: Int) =
"right $velocity"
override fun forward(velocity: Int) =

}

"forward $velocity"
override fun back(velocity: Int) =
"back $velocity"
override fun turboBoost() = "turbo boost"

If we want to expand the functionality of the controls or adjust some
commands, we might try inheriting from SpaceShipControls. This doesn’t
work because SpaceShipControls is not open.
To expose the member functions in Controls, you can create an instance of
SpaceShipControls as a property and explicitly delegate all the exposed
member functions to that instance:
// ClassDelegation/ExplicitDelegation.kt
package classdelegation
import atomictest.eq
class ExplicitControls : Controls {
private val controls = SpaceShipControls()
// Delegation by hand:
override fun up(velocity: Int) =
controls.up(velocity)
override fun back(velocity: Int) =
controls.back(velocity)
override fun down(velocity: Int) =
controls.down(velocity)
override fun forward(velocity: Int) =
controls.forward(velocity)
override fun left(velocity: Int) =
controls.left(velocity)
override fun right(velocity: Int) =
controls.right(velocity)
// Modified implementation:
override fun turboBoost(): String =
controls.turboBoost() + "... boooooost!"
}
fun main() {
val controls = ExplicitControls()
controls.forward(100) eq "forward 100"
controls.turboBoost() eq
"turbo boost... boooooost!"
}

The functions are forwarded to the underlying controls object, and the
resulting interface is the same as if you had used regular inheritance. You
can also provide implementation changes, as with turboBoost().
Kotlin automates the process of class delegation, so instead of writing
explicit function implementations as in ExplicitDelegation.kt, you

specify an object to use as a delegate.
To delegate to a class, place the by keyword after the interface name,
followed by the member property to use as the delegate:
// ClassDelegation/BasicDelegation.kt
package classdelegation
interface AI
class A : AI
class B(val a: A) : AI by a

Read this as “class B implements interface AI by using the a member
object.” You can only delegate to interfaces, so you can’t say A by a. The
delegate object (a) must be a constructor argument.
ExplicitDelegation.kt can now be rewritten using by:
// ClassDelegation/DelegatedControls.kt
package classdelegation
import atomictest.eq
class DelegatedControls(
private val controls: SpaceShipControls =
SpaceShipControls()
): Controls by controls {
override fun turboBoost(): String =
"${controls.turboBoost()}... boooooost!"
}
fun main() {
val controls = DelegatedControls()
controls.forward(100) eq "forward 100"
controls.turboBoost() eq
"turbo boost... boooooost!"
}

When Kotlin sees the by keyword, it generates code similar to what we
wrote for ExplicitDelegation.kt. After delegation, the functions of the
member object are accessible via the outer object, but without writing all
that extra code.
Kotlin doesn’t support multiple class inheritance, but you can simulate it
using class delegation. In general, multiple inheritance is used to combine
classes that have completely different functionality. For example, suppose
you want to produce a button by combining a class that draws a rectangle
on the screen with a class that manages mouse events:

// ClassDelegation/ModelingMI.kt
package classdelegation
import atomictest.eq
interface Rectangle {
fun paint(): String
}
class ButtonImage(
val width: Int,
val height: Int
): Rectangle {
override fun paint() =
"painting ButtonImage($width, $height)"
}
interface MouseManager {
fun clicked(): Boolean
fun hovering(): Boolean
}
class UserInput : MouseManager {
override fun clicked() = true
override fun hovering() = true
}
// Even if we make the classes open, we
// get an error because only one class may
// appear in a supertype list:
// class Button : ButtonImage(), UserInput()
class Button(
val width: Int,
val height: Int,
var image: Rectangle =
ButtonImage(width, height),
private var input: MouseManager = UserInput()
): Rectangle by image, MouseManager by input
fun main() {
val button = Button(10, 5)
button.paint() eq
"painting ButtonImage(10, 5)"
button.clicked() eq true
button.hovering() eq true
// Can upcast to both delegated types:
val rectangle: Rectangle = button
val mouseManager: MouseManager = button
}

The class Button implements two interfaces: Rectangle and MouseManager.
It can’t inherit from implementations of both ButtonImage and UserInput,
but it can delegate to both of them.
Notice that the definition for image in the constructor argument list is both
public and a var. This allows the client programmer to dynamically

replace the ButtonImage.
The last two lines in main() show that a Button can be upcast to both of its
delegated types. This was the goal of multiple inheritance, so delegation
effectively solves the need for multiple inheritance.
Inheritance can be constraining. For example, you cannot inherit a class
when the superclass is not open, or if your new class is already extending
another class. Class delegation releases you from these and other
limitations.
Use class delegation with care. Among the three choices—inheritance,
composition and class delegation—try composition first. It’s the simplest
approach and solves the majority of use cases. Inheritance is necessary
when you need a hierarchy of types, to create relationships between those
types. Class delegation can work when those options don’t.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Downcasting
Downcasting discovers the specific type of a previously-upcast object.
Upcasts are always safe because the base class cannot have a bigger
interface than the derived class. Every base-class member is guaranteed to
exist and is therefore safe to call. Although object-oriented programming is
primarily focused on upcasting, there are situations where downcasting can
be a useful and expedient approach.
Downcasting happens at runtime, and is also called run-time type
identification (RTTI).
Consider a class hierarchy where the base type has a narrower interface
than the derived types. If you upcast an object to the base type, the compiler
no longer knows the specific type. In particular, it cannot know what
extended functions are safe to call:
// DownCasting/NarrowingUpcast.kt
package downcasting
interface Base {
fun f()
}
class Derived1 : Base {
override fun f() {}
fun g() {}
}
class Derived2 : Base {
override fun f() {}
fun h() {}
}
fun main() {
val b1: Base = Derived1() // Upcast
b1.f()
// Part of Base
// b1.g() // Not part of Base
val b2: Base = Derived2() // Upcast
b2.f()
// Part of Base
// b2.h() // Not part of Base
}

To solve this problem, there must be some way to guarantee that a downcast
is correct, so you don’t accidentally cast to the wrong type and call a nonexistent member.

Smart Casts
Smart casts in Kotlin are automatic downcasts. The is keyword checks
whether an object is a particular type. Any code within the scope of that
check assumes that it is that type:
// DownCasting/IsKeyword.kt
import downcasting.*
fun main() {
val b1: Base = Derived1() // Upcast
if(b1 is Derived1)
b1.g() // Within scope of "is" check
val b2: Base = Derived2() // Upcast
if(b2 is Derived2)
b2.h() // Within scope of "is" check
}

If b1 is of type Derived1, you can call g(). If b2 is of type Derived2, you
can call h().
Smart casts are especially useful inside when expressions that use is to
search for the type of the when argument. Note that, in main(), each specific
type is first upcast to a Creature, then passed to what():
// DownCasting/Creature.kt
package downcasting
import atomictest.eq
interface Creature
class Human : Creature {
fun greeting() = "I'm Human"
}
class Dog : Creature {
fun bark() = "Yip!"
}
class Alien : Creature {
fun mobility() = "Three legs"
}
fun what(c: Creature): String =
when (c) {
is Human -> c.greeting()
is Dog -> c.bark()

}

is Alien -> c.mobility()
else -> "Something else"

fun main() {
val c: Creature = Human()
what(c) eq "I'm Human"
what(Dog()) eq "Yip!"
what(Alien()) eq "Three legs"
class Who : Creature
what(Who()) eq "Something else"
}

In main(), upcasting happens when assigning a Human to Creature, passing
a Dog to what(), passing an Alien to what(), and passing a Who to what().
Class hierarchies are traditionally drawn with the base class at the top and
derived classes fanning down below it. what() takes a previously-upcast
Creature and discovers its exact type, thus casting that Creature object
down the inheritance hierarchy, from the more-general base class to a morespecific derived class.
A when expression that produces a value requires an else branch to capture
all remaining possibilities. In main(), the else branch is tested using an
instance of the local class Who.
Each branch of the when uses c as if it is the type we checked for: calling
greeting() if c is Human, bark() if it’s a Dog and mobility() if it’s an
Alien.

The Modifiable Reference
Automatic downcasts are subject to a special constraint. If the base-class
reference to the object is modifiable (a var), then there’s a possibility that
this reference could be assigned to a different object between the instant
that the type is detected and the instant when you call specific functions on
the downcast object. That is, the specific type of the object might change
between type detection and use.
In the following, c is the argument to when, and Kotlin insists that this
argument be immutable so that it cannot change between the is expression
and the call made after the ->:

// DownCasting/MutableSmartCast.kt
package downcasting
class SmartCast1(val c: Creature) {
fun contact() {
when (c) {
is Human -> c.greeting()
is Dog -> c.bark()
is Alien -> c.mobility()
}
}
}
class SmartCast2(var c: Creature) {
fun contact() {
when (val c = c) {
// [1]
is Human -> c.greeting()
// [2]
is Dog -> c.bark()
is Alien -> c.mobility()
}
}
}

The c constructor argument is a val in SmartCast1 and a var in
SmartCast2. In both cases c is passed into the when expression, which uses
a series of smart casts.
In [1], the expression val c = c looks odd, and only used here for
convenience—we don’t recommend “shadowing” identifier names in
normal code. val c creates a new local identifier c that captures the value
of the property c. However, the property c is a var while the local
(shadowed) c is a val. Try removing the val c =. This means that the c
will now be the property, which is a var. This produces an error message
for line [2]:
Smart cast to ‘Human’ is impossible, because ‘c’ is a mutable property
that could have been changed by this time
is Dog and is Alien produce similar messages. This is not limited to
while expressions; there are other situations that can produce the same error

message.

The change described in the error message typically happens through
concurrency, when multiple independent tasks have the opportunity to
change c at unpredictable times. (Concurrency is an advanced topic that we
do not cover in this book).

Kotlin forces us to ensure that c will not change from the time that the is
check is performed and the time that c is used as the downcast type.
SmartCast1 does this by making the c property a val, and SmartCast2 does
it by introducing the local val c.
Similarly, complex expressions cannot be smart-cast because the expression
might be re-evaluated. Properties that are open for inheritance can’t be
smart-cast because their value might be overridden in subclasses, so there’s
no guarantee the value will be the same on the next access.

The as Keyword
The as keyword forcefully casts a general type to a specific type:
// DownCasting/Unsafe.kt
package downcasting
import atomictest.*
fun dogBarkUnsafe(c: Creature) =
(c as Dog).bark()
fun dogBarkUnsafe2(c: Creature): String {
c as Dog
c.bark()
return c.bark() + c.bark()
}
fun main() {
dogBarkUnsafe(Dog()) eq "Yip!"
dogBarkUnsafe2(Dog()) eq "Yip!Yip!"
(capture {
dogBarkUnsafe(Human())
}) contains listOf("ClassCastException")
}

dogBarkUnsafe2() shows a second form of as: if you say c as Dog, then c
is treated as a Dog throughout the rest of the scope.

A failing as cast throws a ClassCastException. A plain as is called an
unsafe cast.
When a safe cast as? fails, it doesn’t throw an exception, but instead returns
null. You must then do something reasonable with that null to prevent a
later NullPointerException. The Elvis operator (described in Safe Calls &
the Elvis Operator) is usually the most straightforward approach:

// DownCasting/Safe.kt
package downcasting
import atomictest.eq
fun dogBarkSafe(c: Creature) =
(c as? Dog)?.bark() ?: "Not a Dog"
fun main() {
dogBarkSafe(Dog()) eq "Yip!"
dogBarkSafe(Human()) eq "Not a Dog"
}

If c is not a Dog, as? produces a null. Thus, (c as? Dog) is a nullable
expression and we must use the safe call operator ?. to call bark(). If as?
produces a null, then the whole expression (c as? Dog)?.bark() will also
produce a null, which the Elvis operator handles by producing "Not a
Dog".

Discovering Types in Lists
When used in a predicate, is finds objects of a given type within a List, or
any iterable (something you can iterate through):
// DownCasting/FindType.kt
package downcasting
import atomictest.eq
val group: List<Creature> = listOf(
Human(), Human(), Dog(), Alien(), Dog()
)
fun main() {
val dog = group
.find { it is Dog } as Dog?
dog?.bark() eq "Yip!"
}

// [1]
// [2]

Because group contains Creatures, find() returns a Creature. We want to
treat it as a Dog, so we explicitly cast it at the end of line [1]. There might be
zero Dogs in group, in which case find() returns a null so we must cast the
result to a nullable Dog?. Because dog is nullable, we use the safe call
operator in line [2].
You can usually avoid the code in line [1] by using filterIsInstance(),
which produces all elements of a specific type:
// DownCasting/FilterIsInstance.kt
import downcasting.*

import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val humans1: List<Creature> =
group.filter { it is Human }
humans1.size eq 2
val humans2: List<Human> =
group.filterIsInstance<Human>()
humans2 eq humans1
}

filterIsInstance() is a more readable way to produce the same result as
filter(). However, the result types are different: while filter() returns a
List of Creature (even though all the resulting elements are Human),
filterIsInstance() returns a list of the target type Human. We’ve also
eliminated the nullability issues seen in FindType.kt.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Sealed Classes
To constrain a class hierarchy, declare the superclass sealed.
Consider a trip taken by travelers using different modes of transportation:
// SealedClasses/UnSealed.kt
package withoutsealedclasses
import atomictest.eq
open class Transport
data class Train(
val line: String
): Transport()
data class Bus(
val number: String,
val capacity: Int
): Transport()
fun travel(transport: Transport) =
when (transport) {
is Train ->
"Train ${transport.line}"
is Bus ->
"Bus ${transport.number}: " +
"size ${transport.capacity}"
else -> "$transport is in limbo!"
}
fun main() {
listOf(Train("S1"), Bus("11", 90))
.map(::travel) eq
"[Train S1, Bus 11: size 90]"
}

Train and Bus each contain different details about their Transport mode.
travel() contains a when expression that discovers the exact type of the
transport parameter. Kotlin requires the default else branch, because
there might be other subclasses of Transport.
travel() shows downcasting’s inherent trouble spot. Suppose you inherit
Tram as a new type of Transport. If you do this, travel() continues to

compile and run, giving you no clue that you should modify it to detect

Tram. If you have many instances of downcasting scattered throughout your

code, this becomes a maintenance challenge.

We can improve the situation using the sealed keyword. When defining
Transport, replace open class with sealed class:
// SealedClasses/SealedClasses.kt
package sealedclasses
import atomictest.eq
sealed class Transport
data class Train(
val line: String
) : Transport()
data class Bus(
val number: String,
val capacity: Int
) : Transport()
fun travel(transport: Transport) =
when (transport) {
is Train ->
"Train ${transport.line}"
is Bus ->
"Bus ${transport.number}: " +
"size ${transport.capacity}"
}
fun main() {
listOf(Train("S1"), Bus("11", 90))
.map(::travel) eq
"[Train S1, Bus 11: size 90]"
}

All direct subclasses of a sealed class must be located in the same file as
the base class.
Although Kotlin forces you to exhaustively check all possible types in a
when expression, the when in travel() no longer requires an else branch.
Because Transport is sealed, Kotlin knows that no additional subclasses
of Transport exist other than the ones present in this file. The when
expression is now exhaustive without an else branch.
sealed hierarchies discover errors when adding new subclasses. When you

introduce a new subclass, you must update all the code that uses the
existing hierarchy. The travel() function in UnSealed.kt will continue to
work because the else branch produces "$transport is in limbo!" on

unknown types of transportation. However, that’s probably not the behavior
you want.
A sealed class reveals all the places to modify when we add a new subclass
such as Tram. The travel() function in SealedClasses.kt won’t compile
if we introduce the Tram class without making additional changes. The
sealed keyword makes it impossible to ignore the problem, because you
get a compilation error.
The sealed keyword makes downcasting more palatable, but you should
still be suspicious of designs that make excessive use of downcasting. There
is often a better and cleaner way to write that code using polymorphism.
sealed vs. abstract

Here we show that both abstract and sealed classes allow identical types
of functions, properties, and constructors:
// SealedClasses/SealedVsAbstract.kt
package sealedclasses
abstract class Abstract(val av: String) {
open fun concreteFunction() {}
open val concreteProperty = ""
abstract fun abstractFunction(): String
abstract val abstractProperty: String
init {}
constructor(c: Char) : this(c.toString())
}
open class Concrete() : Abstract("") {
override fun concreteFunction() {}
override val concreteProperty = ""
override fun abstractFunction() = ""
override val abstractProperty = ""
}
sealed class Sealed(val av: String) {
open fun concreteFunction() {}
open val concreteProperty = ""
abstract fun abstractFunction(): String
abstract val abstractProperty: String
init {}
constructor(c: Char) : this(c.toString())
}
open class SealedSubclass() : Sealed("") {
override fun concreteFunction() {}
override val concreteProperty = ""
override fun abstractFunction() = ""
override val abstractProperty = ""

}
fun main() {
Concrete()
SealedSubclass()
}

A sealed class is basically an abstract class with the extra constraint that
all direct subclasses must be defined within the same file.
Indirect subclasses of a sealed class can be defined in a separate file:
// SealedClasses/ThirdLevelSealed.kt
package sealedclasses
class ThirdLevel : SealedSubclass()

ThirdLevel doesn’t directly inherit from Sealed so it doesn’t need to reside
in SealedVsAbstract.kt.

Although a sealed interface seems like it would be a useful construct,
Kotlin doesn’t provide it because Java classes cannot be prevented from
implementing the same interface.

Enumerating Subclasses
When a class is sealed, you can easily iterate through its subclasses:
// SealedClasses/SealedSubclasses.kt
package sealedclasses
import atomictest.eq
sealed class Top
class Middle1 : Top()
class Middle2 : Top()
open class Middle3 : Top()
class Bottom3 : Middle3()
fun main() {
Top::class.sealedSubclasses
.map { it.simpleName } eq
"[Middle1, Middle2, Middle3]"
}

Creating a class generates a class object. You can access properties and
member functions of that class object to discover information, and to create
and manipulate objects of that class. ::class produces a class object, so
Top::class produces the class object for Top.

One of the properties of class objects is sealedSubclasses, which expects
that Top is a sealed class (otherwise it produces an empty list).
sealedSubclasses produces all the class objects of those subclasses.
Notice that only the immediate subclasses of Top appear in the result.
The toString() for a class object is slightly verbose. We produce the class
name alone by using the simpleName property.
sealedSubclasses uses reflection, which requires that the dependency
kotlin-reflection.jar be in the classpath. Reflection is a way to

dynamically discover and use characteristics of a class.

sealedSubclasses can be an important tool when building polymorphic

systems. It can ensure that new classes will automatically be included in all
appropriate operations. Because it discovers the subclasses at runtime,
however, it may have a performance impact on your system. If you are
having speed issues, be sure to use a profiler to discover whether
sealedSubclasses might be the problem (as you learn to use a profiler,
you’ll discover that performance problems are usually not where you guess
them to be).
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Type Checking
In Kotlin you can easily act on an object based on its type. Normally
this activity is the domain of polymorphism, so type checking enables
interesting design choices.
Traditionally, type checking is used for special cases. For example, the
majority of insects can fly, but there are a tiny number that cannot. It
doesn’t make sense to burden the Insect interface with the few insects that
are unable to fly, so in basic() we use type checking to pick those out:
// TypeChecking/Insects.kt
package typechecking
import atomictest.eq
interface Insect {
fun walk() = "$name: walk"
fun fly() = "$name: fly"
}
class HouseFly : Insect
class Flea : Insect {
override fun fly() =
throw Exception("Flea cannot fly")
fun crawl() = "Flea: crawl"
}
fun Insect.basic() =
walk() + " " +
if (this is Flea)
crawl()
else
fly()
interface SwimmingInsect: Insect {
fun swim() = "$name: swim"
}
interface WaterWalker: Insect {
fun walkWater() =
"$name: walk on water"
}
class WaterBeetle : SwimmingInsect
class WaterStrider : WaterWalker
class WhirligigBeetle :
SwimmingInsect, WaterWalker

fun Insect.water() =
when(this) {
is SwimmingInsect -> swim()
is WaterWalker -> walkWater()
else -> "$name: drown"
}
fun main() {
val insects = listOf(
HouseFly(), Flea(), WaterStrider(),
WaterBeetle(), WhirligigBeetle()
)
insects.map { it.basic() } eq
"[HouseFly: walk HouseFly: fly, " +
"Flea: walk Flea: crawl, " +
"WaterStrider: walk WaterStrider: fly, " +
"WaterBeetle: walk WaterBeetle: fly, " +
"WhirligigBeetle: walk " +
"WhirligigBeetle: fly]"
insects.map { it.water() } eq
"[HouseFly: drown, Flea: drown, " +
"WaterStrider: walk on water, " +
"WaterBeetle: swim, " +
"WhirligigBeetle: swim]"
}

There are also a very small number of insects that can walk on water or
swim underwater. Again, it doesn’t make sense to put those special-case
behaviors in the base class to support such a small fraction of types. Instead,
Insect.water() contains a when expression that selects those subtypes for
special behavior and assumes standard behavior for everything else.
Selecting a few isolated types for special treatment is the typical use case
for type checking. Notice that adding new types to the system doesn’t
impact the existing code (unless a new type also requires special treatment).
To simplify the code, name produces the type of the object pointed to by the
this under question:
// TypeChecking/AnyName.kt
package typechecking
val Any.name
get() = this::class.simpleName

name takes an Any and gets the associated class reference using ::class,
then produces the simpleName of that class.

Now consider a variation of the “shape” example:

// TypeChecking/TypeCheck1.kt
package typechecking
import atomictest.eq
interface Shape {
fun draw(): String
}
class Circle : Shape {
override fun draw() = "Circle: Draw"
}
class Square : Shape {
override fun draw() = "Square: Draw"
fun rotate() = "Square: Rotate"
}
fun turn(s: Shape) = when(s) {
is Square -> s.rotate()
else -> ""
}
fun main() {
val shapes = listOf(Circle(), Square())
shapes.map { it.draw() } eq
"[Circle: Draw, Square: Draw]"
shapes.map { turn(it) } eq
"[, Square: Rotate]"
}

There are several reasons why you might add rotate() to Square instead
of Shape:
The Shape interface is out of your control, so you cannot modify it.
Rotating Square seems like a special case that shouldn’t burden and/or
complicate the Shape interface.
You’re just trying to quickly solve a problem by adding Square and
you don’t want to take the trouble of putting rotate() in Shape and
implementing it in all the subtypes.
There are certainly situations when this solution doesn’t negatively impact
your design, and Kotlin’s when produces clean and straightforward code.
If, however, you must evolve your system by adding more types, it begins
to get messy:
// TypeChecking/TypeCheck2.kt
package typechecking
import atomictest.eq
class Triangle : Shape {

}

override fun draw() = "Triangle: Draw"
fun rotate() = "Triangle: Rotate"

fun turn2(s: Shape) = when(s) {
is Square -> s.rotate()
is Triangle -> s.rotate()
else -> ""
}
fun main() {
val shapes =
listOf(Circle(), Square(), Triangle())
shapes.map { it.draw() } eq
"[Circle: Draw, Square: Draw, " +
"Triangle: Draw]"
shapes.map { turn(it) } eq
"[, Square: Rotate, ]"
shapes.map { turn2(it) } eq
"[, Square: Rotate, Triangle: Rotate]"
}

The polymorphic call in shapes.map { it.draw() } adapts to the new
Triangle class without any changes or errors. Also, Kotlin disallows
Triangle unless it implements draw().
The original turn() doesn’t break when we add Triangle, but it also
doesn’t produce the result we want. turn() must become turn2() to
generate the desired behavior.
Suppose your system begins to accumulate more functions like turn(). The
Shape logic is now distributed across all these functions, rather than being
centralized within the Shape hierarchy. If you add more new types of Shape,
you must search for every function containing a when that switches on a
Shape type, and modify it to include the new case. If you miss any of these
functions, the compiler won’t catch it.
turn() and turn2() exhibit what is often called type-check coding, which

means testing for every type in your system. (If you are only looking for
one or a few special types it is not usually considered type-check coding).

In traditional object-oriented languages, type-check coding is usually
considered an antipattern because it invites the creation of one or more
pieces of code that must be vigilantly maintained and updated whenever
you add or change types in your system. Polymorphism, on the other hand,

encapsulates those changes into the types that you add or modify, and those
changes are then transparently propagated through your system.
Note that the problem only occurs when the system needs to evolve by
adding more Shape types. If that’s not how your system evolves, you won’t
encounter the issue. If it is a problem it doesn’t usually happen suddenly,
but becomes steadily more difficult as your system evolves.
We shall see that Kotlin significantly mitigates this problem through the use
of sealed classes. The solution isn’t perfect, but type checking becomes a
much more reasonable design choice.

Type Checking in Auxiliary Functions
The essence of a BeverageContainer is that it holds and delivers
beverages. It seems to make sense to treat recycling as an auxiliary
function:
// TypeChecking/BeverageContainer.kt
package typechecking
import atomictest.eq
interface BeverageContainer {
fun open(): String
fun pour(): String
}
class Can : BeverageContainer {
override fun open() = "Pop Top"
override fun pour() = "Can: Pour"
}
open class Bottle : BeverageContainer {
override fun open() = "Remove Cap"
override fun pour() = "Bottle: Pour"
}
class GlassBottle : Bottle()
class PlasticBottle : Bottle()
fun BeverageContainer.recycle() =
when(this) {
is Can -> "Recycle Can"
is GlassBottle -> "Recycle Glass"
else -> "Landfill"
}
fun main() {
val refrigerator = listOf(
Can(), GlassBottle(), PlasticBottle()
)

}

refrigerator.map { it.open() } eq
"[Pop Top, Remove Cap, Remove Cap]"
refrigerator.map { it.recycle() } eq
"[Recycle Can, Recycle Glass, " +
"Landfill]"

By defining recycle() as an auxiliary function it captures the different
recycling behaviors in a single place, rather than having them distributed
throughout the BeverageContainer hierarchy by making recycle() a
member function.
Acting on types with when is clean and straightforward, but the design is
still problematic. When you add a new type, recycle() quietly uses the
else clause. Because of this, necessary changes to type-checking functions
like recycle() might be missed. What we’d like is for the compiler to tell
us that we’ve forgotten a type check, just as it does when we implement an
interface or inherit an abstract class and it tells us we’ve forgotten to
override a function.
sealed classes provide a significant improvement here. Making Shape a
sealed class means that the when in turn() (after removing the else)
requires that each type be checked. Interfaces cannot be sealed so we must
rewrite Shape into a class:
// TypeChecking/TypeCheck3.kt
package typechecking3
import atomictest.eq
import typechecking.name
sealed class Shape {
fun draw() = "$name: Draw"
}
class Circle : Shape()
class Square : Shape() {
fun rotate() = "Square: Rotate"
}
class Triangle : Shape() {
fun rotate() = "Triangle: Rotate"
}
fun turn(s: Shape) = when(s) {
is Circle -> ""
is Square -> s.rotate()
is Triangle -> s.rotate()
}

fun main() {
val shapes = listOf(Circle(), Square())
shapes.map { it.draw() } eq
"[Circle: Draw, Square: Draw]"
shapes.map { turn(it) } eq
"[, Square: Rotate]"
}

If we add a new Shape, the compiler tells us to add a new type-check path
in turn().
But let’s look at what happens when we try to apply sealed to the
BeverageContainer problem. In the process, we create additional Can and
Bottle subtypes:
// TypeChecking/BeverageContainer2.kt
package typechecking2
import atomictest.eq
sealed class BeverageContainer {
abstract fun open(): String
abstract fun pour(): String
}
sealed class Can : BeverageContainer() {
override fun open() = "Pop Top"
override fun pour() = "Can: Pour"
}
class SteelCan : Can()
class AluminumCan : Can()
sealed class Bottle : BeverageContainer() {
override fun open() = "Remove Cap"
override fun pour() = "Bottle: Pour"
}
class GlassBottle : Bottle()
sealed class PlasticBottle : Bottle()
class PETBottle : PlasticBottle()
class HDPEBottle : PlasticBottle()
fun BeverageContainer.recycle() =
when(this) {
is Can -> "Recycle Can"
is Bottle -> "Recycle Bottle"
}
fun BeverageContainer.recycle2() =
when(this) {
is Can -> when(this) {
is SteelCan -> "Recycle Steel"
is AluminumCan -> "Recycle Aluminum"
}
is Bottle -> when(this) {
is GlassBottle -> "Recycle Glass"
is PlasticBottle -> when(this) {

}

}

}

is PETBottle -> "Recycle PET"
is HDPEBottle -> "Recycle HDPE"

fun main() {
val refrigerator = listOf(
SteelCan(), AluminumCan(),
GlassBottle(),
PETBottle(), HDPEBottle()
)
refrigerator.map { it.open() } eq
"[Pop Top, Pop Top, Remove Cap, " +
"Remove Cap, Remove Cap]"
refrigerator.map { it.recycle() } eq
"[Recycle Can, Recycle Can, " +
"Recycle Bottle, Recycle Bottle, " +
"Recycle Bottle]"
refrigerator.map { it.recycle2() } eq
"[Recycle Steel, Recycle Aluminum, " +
"Recycle Glass, " +
"Recycle PET, Recycle HDPE]"
}

Note that the intermediate classes Can and Bottle must also be sealed for
this approach to work.
As long as the classes are direct subclasses of BeverageContainer, the
compiler guarantees that the when in recycle() is exhaustive. But
subclasses like GlassBottle and AluminumCan are not checked. To solve
the problem we must explicitly include the nested when expressions seen in
recycle2(), at which point the compiler does require exhaustive type
checks (try commenting one of the specific Can or Bottle types to verify
this).
To create a robust type-checking solution you must rigorously use sealed at
each intermediate level of the class hierarchy, while ensuring that each level
of subclasses has a corresponding nested when. In this case, if you add a
new subtype of Can or Bottle the compiler ensures that recycle2() tests
for each subtype.
Although not as clean as polymorphism, this is a significant improvement
over prior object-oriented languages, and allows you to choose whether to
write a polymorphic member function or auxiliary function. Notice that this
problem only occurs when you have multiple levels of inheritance.

For comparison, let’s rewrite BeverageContainer2.kt by bringing
recycle() into BeverageContainer, which can again be an interface:
// TypeChecking/BeverageContainer3.kt
package typechecking3
import atomictest.eq
import typechecking.name
interface BeverageContainer {
fun open(): String
fun pour() = "$name: Pour"
fun recycle(): String
}
abstract class Can : BeverageContainer {
override fun open() = "Pop Top"
}
class SteelCan : Can() {
override fun recycle() = "Recycle Steel"
}
class AluminumCan : Can() {
override fun recycle() = "Recycle Aluminum"
}
abstract class Bottle : BeverageContainer {
override fun open() = "Remove Cap"
}
class GlassBottle : Bottle() {
override fun recycle() = "Recycle Glass"
}
abstract class PlasticBottle : Bottle()
class PETBottle : PlasticBottle() {
override fun recycle() = "Recycle PET"
}
class HDPEBottle : PlasticBottle() {
override fun recycle() = "Recycle HDPE"
}
fun main() {
val refrigerator = listOf(
SteelCan(), AluminumCan(),
GlassBottle(),
PETBottle(), HDPEBottle()
)
refrigerator.map { it.open() } eq
"[Pop Top, Pop Top, Remove Cap, " +
"Remove Cap, Remove Cap]"
refrigerator.map { it.recycle() } eq
"[Recycle Steel, Recycle Aluminum, " +
"Recycle Glass, " +
"Recycle PET, Recycle HDPE]"
}

By making Can and Bottle abstract classes, we force their subclasses to
override recycle() in the same way that the compiler forces each type to
be checked inside recycle2() in BeverageContainer2.kt.
Now the behavior of recycle() is distributed among the classes, which
might be fine—it’s a design decision. If you decide that recycling behavior
changes often and you’d like to have it all in one place, then using the
auxiliary type-checked recycle2() from BeverageContainer2.kt might be
a better choice for your needs, and Kotlin’s features make that reasonable.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Nested Classes
Nested classes enable more refined structures within your objects.
A nested class is simply a class within the namespace of the outer class. The
implication is that the outer class “owns” the nested class. This feature is
not essential, but nesting a class can clarify your code. Here, Plane is
nested within Airport:
// NestedClasses/Airport.kt
package nestedclasses
import atomictest.eq
import nestedclasses.Airport.Plane
class Airport(private val code: String) {
open class Plane {
// Can access private properties:
fun contact(airport: Airport) =
"Contacting ${airport.code}"
}
private class PrivatePlane : Plane()
fun privatePlane(): Plane = PrivatePlane()
}
fun main() {
val denver = Airport("DEN")
var plane = Plane()
// [1]
plane.contact(denver) eq "Contacting DEN"
// Can't do this:
// val privatePlane = Airport.PrivatePlane()
val frankfurt = Airport("FRA")
plane = frankfurt.privatePlane()
// Can't do this:
// val p = plane as PrivatePlane
// [2]
plane.contact(frankfurt) eq "Contacting FRA"
}

In contact(), the nested class Plane has access to the private property
code in the airport argument, whereas an ordinary class would not have
this access. Other than that, Plane is simply a class inside the Airport
namespace.
Creating a Plane object does not require an Airport object, but if you
create it outside the Airport class body, you must ordinarily qualify the

constructor call in [1]. By importing nestedclasses.Airport.Plane we
avoid this qualification.
A nested class can be private, as with PrivatePlane. Making it private
means that PrivatePlane is completely invisible outside the body of
Airport, so you cannot call the PrivatePlane constructor outside of
Airport. If you define and return a PrivatePlane from a member function,
as seen in privatePlane(), the result must be upcast to a public type
(assuming it extends a public type), and cannot be downcast to the
private type, as seen in [2].
Here’s an example of nesting where Cleanable is a base class for both the
enclosing class House and all the nested classes. clean() goes through a
List of parts and calls clean() for each one, producing a kind of
recursion:
// NestedClasses/NestedHouse.kt
package nestedclasses
import atomictest.*
abstract class Cleanable(val id: String) {
open val parts: List<Cleanable> = listOf()
fun clean(): String {
val text = "$id clean"
if (parts.isEmpty()) return text
return "${parts.joinToString(
" ", "(", ")",
transform = Cleanable::clean)} $text\n"
}
}
class House : Cleanable("House") {
override val parts = listOf(
Bedroom("Master Bedroom"),
Bedroom("Guest Bedroom")
)
class Bedroom(id: String) : Cleanable(id) {
override val parts =
listOf(Closet(), Bathroom())
class Closet : Cleanable("Closet") {
override val parts =
listOf(Shelf(), Shelf())
class Shelf : Cleanable("Shelf")
}
class Bathroom : Cleanable("Bathroom") {
override val parts =
listOf(Toilet(), Sink())
class Toilet : Cleanable("Toilet")
class Sink : Cleanable("Sink")
}
}
}

fun main() {
House().clean() eq """
(((Shelf clean Shelf clean) Closet clean
(Toilet clean Sink clean) Bathroom clean
) Master Bedroom clean
((Shelf clean Shelf clean) Closet clean
(Toilet clean Sink clean) Bathroom clean
) Guest Bedroom clean
) House clean
"""
}

Notice the multiple levels of nesting. For example, Bedroom contains
Bathroom which contains Toilet and Sink.

Local Classes
Classes that are nested inside functions are called local classes:
// NestedClasses/LocalClasses.kt
package nestedclasses
fun localClasses() {
open class Amphibian
class Frog : Amphibian()
val amphibian: Amphibian = Frog()
}

Amphibian looks like a candidate to be an interface rather than an open
class. However, local interfaces are not allowed.

Local open classes should be rare; if you need one, what you’re trying to
make is probably significant enough to create a regular class.
Amphibian and Frog are invisible outside localClasses(), so you can’t

return them from the function. To return objects of local classes, you must
upcast them to a class or interface defined outside the function:
// NestedClasses/ReturnLocal.kt
package nestedclasses
interface Amphibian
fun createAmphibian(): Amphibian {
class Frog : Amphibian
return Frog()
}
fun main() {
val amphibian = createAmphibian()

}

// amphibian as Frog

Frog is still invisible outside createAmphibian()—in main(), you cannot
cast amphibian to a Frog because Frog isn’t available, so Kotlin reports the
attempt to use Frog as an “unresolved reference.”

Classes Inside Interfaces
Classes can be nested within interfaces:
// NestedClasses/WithinInterface.kt
package nestedclasses
import atomictest.eq
interface Item {
val type: Type
data class Type(val type: String)
}
class Bolt(type: String) : Item {
override val type = Item.Type(type)
}
fun main() {
val items = listOf(
Bolt("Slotted"), Bolt("Hex")
)
items.map(Item::type) eq
"[Type(type=Slotted), Type(type=Hex)]"
}

In Bolt, the val type must be overridden and assigned using the qualified
class name Item.Type.

Nested Enumerations
Enumerations are classes, so they can be nested inside other classes:
// NestedClasses/Ticket.kt
package nestedclasses
import atomictest.eq
import nestedclasses.Ticket.Seat.*
class Ticket(
val name: String,
val seat: Seat = Coach
) {
enum class Seat {
Coach,
Premium,
Business,

}

First
}
fun upgrade(): Ticket {
val newSeat = values()[
(seat.ordinal + 1)
.coerceAtMost(First.ordinal)
]
return Ticket(name, newSeat)
}
fun meal() = when(seat) {
Coach -> "Bag Meal"
Premium -> "Bag Meal with Cookie"
Business -> "Hot Meal"
First -> "Private Chef"
}
override fun toString() = "$seat"

fun main() {
val tickets = listOf(
Ticket("Jerry"),
Ticket("Summer", Premium),
Ticket("Squanchy", Business),
Ticket("Beth", First)
)
tickets.map(Ticket::meal) eq
"[Bag Meal, Bag Meal with Cookie, " +
"Hot Meal, Private Chef]"
tickets.map(Ticket::upgrade) eq
"[Premium, Business, First, First]"
tickets eq
"[Coach, Premium, Business, First]"
tickets.map(Ticket::meal) eq
"[Bag Meal, Bag Meal with Cookie, " +
"Hot Meal, Private Chef]"
}

upgrade() adds one to the ordinal value of the seat, then uses the library
function coerceAtMost() to ensure the new value does not exceed
First.ordinal before indexing into values() to produce the new Seat
type. Following functional programming principles, upgrading a Ticket
produces a new Ticket rather than modifying the old one.
meal() uses when to test every type of Seat and this suggests we could use

polymorphism instead.

Enumerations cannot be nested within functions, and cannot inherit from
other classes (including other enumerations).
Interfaces can contain nested enumerations. FillIt is a game-like
simulation that fills a square grid with randomly-chosen X and O marks:

// NestedClasses/FillIt.kt
package nestedclasses
import nestedclasses.Game.State.*
import nestedclasses.Game.Mark.*
import kotlin.random.Random
import atomictest.*
interface Game {
enum class State { Playing, Finished }
enum class Mark { Blank, X ,O }
}
class FillIt(
val side: Int = 3, randomSeed: Int = 0
): Game {
val rand = Random(randomSeed)
private var state = Playing
private val grid =
MutableList(side * side) { Blank }
private var player = X
fun turn() {
val blanks = grid.withIndex()
.filter { it.value == Blank }
if(blanks.isEmpty()) {
state = Finished
} else {
grid[blanks.random(rand).index] = player
player = if (player == X) O else X
}
}
fun play() {
while(state != Finished)
turn()
}
override fun toString() =
grid.chunked(side).joinToString("\n")
}
fun main() {
val game = FillIt(8, 17)
game.play()
game eq """
[O, X, O, X, O, X, X, X]
[X, O, O, O, O, O, X, X]
[O, O, X, O, O, O, X, X]
[X, O, O, O, O, O, X, O]
[X, X, O, O, X, X, X, O]
[X, X, O, O, X, X, O, X]
[O, X, X, O, O, O, X, O]
[X, O, X, X, X, O, X, X]
"""
}

For testability, we seed a Random object with randomSeed to produce
identical output each time the program runs. Each element of grid is
initialized with Blank. In turn(), we first find all cells containing Blank,
along with their indices. If there are no more Blank cells then the simulation

is complete. Otherwise, we use random() with our seeded generator to
select one of the Blank cells. Because we used withIndex() earlier, we
must select the index property to produce the location of the cell we want
to change.
To display the List in the form of a two-dimensional grid, toString() uses
the chunked() library function to break the List into pieces, each of length
side, then joins these together with newlines.
Try experimenting with FillIt using different sides and randomSeeds.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Objects
The object keyword defines something that looks roughly like a class.
However, you can’t create instances of an object—there’s only one.
This is sometimes called the Singleton pattern.
An object is a way to combine functions and properties that logically
belong together, but this combination either doesn’t require multiple
instances, or you want to explicitly prevent multiple instances. You never
create an instance of an object—there’s only one and it’s available once
the object has been defined:
// Objects/ObjectKeyword.kt
package objects
import atomictest.eq
object JustOne {
val n = 2
fun f() = n * 10
fun g() = this.n * 20
}

// [1]

fun main() {
// val x = JustOne() // Error
JustOne.n eq 2
JustOne.f() eq 20
JustOne.g() eq 40
}

Here, you can’t say JustOne() to create a new instance of a class JustOne.
That’s because the object keyword defines the structure and creates the
object at the same time. In addition, it places the elements inside the
object’s namespace. If you only want the object to be visible within the
current file, you can make it private.
[1] The this keyword refers to the single object instance.
You cannot provide a parameter list for an object.

Naming conventions are slightly different when using object. Typically,
when we create an instance of a class, we lower-case the first letter of the
instance name. When you create an object, however, Kotlin defines the
class and creates a single instance of that class. We capitalize the first letter
of the object name because it also represents a class.
An object can inherit from a regular class or interface:
// Objects/ObjectInheritance.kt
package objects
import atomictest.eq
open class Paint(val color: String) {
open fun apply() = "Applying $color"
}
object Acrylic: Paint("Blue") {
override fun apply() =
"Acrylic, ${super.apply()}"
}
interface PaintPreparation {
fun prepare(): String
}
object Prepare: PaintPreparation {
override fun prepare() = "Scrape"
}
fun main() {
Prepare.prepare() eq "Scrape"
Paint("Green").apply() eq "Applying Green"
Acrylic.apply() eq "Acrylic, Applying Blue"
}

There’s only a single instance of an object, so that instance is shared across
all code that uses it. Here’s an object in its own package:
// Objects/GlobalSharing.kt
package objectsharing
object Shared {
var i: Int = 0
}

We can now use Shared in a different package:
// Objects/Share1.kt
package objectshare1
import objectsharing.Shared
fun f() {

}

Shared.i += 5

And within a third package:
// Objects/Share2.kt
package objectshare2
import objectsharing.Shared
import objectshare1.f
import atomictest.eq
fun g() {
Shared.i += 7
}
fun main() {
f()
g()
Shared.i eq 12
}

You can see from the results that Shared is the same object in all packages,
which makes sense because object creates a single instance. If you make
Shared private, it’s not available in the other files.
objects can’t be placed inside functions, but they can be nested inside other
objects or classes (as long as those classes are not themselves nested

within other classes):

// Objects/ObjectNesting.kt
package objects
import atomictest.eq
object Outer {
object Nested {
val a = "Outer.Nested.a"
}
}
class HasObject {
object Nested {
val a = "HasObject.Nested.a"
}
}
fun main() {
Outer.Nested.a eq "Outer.Nested.a"
HasObject.Nested.a eq "HasObject.Nested.a"
}

There’s another way to put an object inside a class: a companion object,
which you’ll see in the Companion Objects atom.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Inner Classes
Inner classes are like nested classes, but an object of an inner class
maintains a reference to the outer class.
An inner class has an implicit link to the outer class. In the following
example, Hotel is like Airport from Nested Classes, but it uses inner
classes. Note that reception is part of Hotel, but callReception(), which
is a member of the nested class Room, accesses reception without
qualification:
// InnerClasses/Hotel.kt
package innerclasses
import atomictest.eq
class Hotel(private val reception: String) {
open inner class Room(val id: Int = 0) {
// Uses 'reception' from outer class:
fun callReception() =
"Room $id Calling $reception"
}
private inner class Closet : Room()
fun closet(): Room = Closet()
}
fun main() {
val nycHotel = Hotel("311")
// You need an outer object to
// create an instance of the inner class:
val room = nycHotel.Room(319)
room.callReception() eq
"Room 319 Calling 311"
val sfHotel = Hotel("0")
val closet = sfHotel.closet()
closet.callReception() eq "Room 0 Calling 0"
}

Because Closet inherits the inner class Room, Closet must also be an inner
class. Nested classes cannot inherit from inner classes.
Closet is private, so it is only visible within the scope of Hotel.

An inner object keeps a reference to its associated outer object. Thus, when
creating an inner object you must first have an outer object. You cannot

create a Room object without a Hotel object, as you see with
nycHotel.Room().
inner data classes are not allowed.

Qualified this
One of the benefits of classes is the this reference. You don’t have to
explicitly say “the current object” when you access a property or member
function.
With a simple class, the meaning of this is obvious, but with an inner
class, this could refer to either the inner object or an outer object. To
resolve this issue, Kotlin provides the qualified this syntax: this followed
by @ and the name of the target class.
Consider three levels of classes: an outer class Fruit containing an inner
class Seed, which itself contains an inner class DNA:
// InnerClasses/QualifiedThis.kt
package innerclasses
import atomictest.eq
import typechecking.name
class Fruit { // Implicit label @Fruit
fun changeColor(color: String) =
"Fruit $color"
fun absorbWater(amount: Int) {}
inner class Seed { // Implicit label @Seed
fun changeColor(color: String) =
"Seed $color"
fun germinate() {}
fun whichThis() {
// Defaults to the current class:
this.name eq "Seed"
// To clarify, you can redundantly
// qualify the default this:
this@Seed.name eq "Seed"
// Must explicitly access Fruit:
this@Fruit.name eq "Fruit"
// Cannot access a further-inner class:
// this@DNA.name
}
inner class DNA { // Implicit label @DNA
fun changeColor(color: String) {
// changeColor(color) // Recursive
this@Seed.changeColor(color)
this@Fruit.changeColor(color)
}
fun plant() {
// Call outer-class functions

// Without qualification:
germinate()
absorbWater(10)

}

}

}

}
// Extension function:
fun Int.grow() { // Implicit label @grow
// Default is the Int.grow() receiver:
this.name eq "Int"
// Redundant qualification:
this@grow.name eq "Int"
// You can still access everything:
this@DNA.name eq "DNA"
this@Seed.name eq "Seed"
this@Fruit.name eq "Fruit"
}
// Extension functions on outer classes:
fun Seed.plant() {}
fun Fruit.plant() {}
fun whichThis() {
// Defaults to the current class:
this.name eq "DNA"
// Redundant qualification:
this@DNA.name eq "DNA"
// The others must be explicit:
this@Seed.name eq "Seed"
this@Fruit.name eq "Fruit"
}

// Extension function:
fun Fruit.grow(amount: Int) {
absorbWater(amount)
// Calls Fruit's version of changeColor():
changeColor("Red") eq "Fruit Red"
}
// Inner-class extension function:
fun Fruit.Seed.grow(n: Int) {
germinate()
// Calls Seed's version of changeColor():
changeColor("Green") eq "Seed Green"
}
// Inner-class extension function:
fun Fruit.Seed.DNA.grow(n: Int) = n.grow()
fun main() {
val fruit = Fruit()
fruit.grow(4)
val seed = fruit.Seed()
seed.grow(9)
seed.whichThis()
val dna = seed.DNA()
dna.plant()
dna.grow(5)
dna.whichThis()
dna.changeColor("Purple")
}

Fruit, Seed and DNA all have functions called changeColor(), but there’s

no overriding—this is not an inheritance relationship. Because they have
the same name and signature, the only way to distinguish them is with a
qualified this, as you see in DNA’s changeColor(). Inside plant(),
functions in either of the two outer classes can be called without
qualification if there are no name collisions.
Even though it’s an extension function, grow() can still access all the
objects in the outer class. grow() can be called anywhere the
Fruit.Seed.DNA implicit receiver is available; for example, inside an
extension function for DNA.

Inner Class Inheritance
An inner class can inherit another inner class from a different outer class.
Here, Yolk in BigEgg is derived from Yolk in Egg:
// InnerClasses/InnerClassInheritance.kt
package innerclasses
import atomictest.*
open class Egg {
private var yolk = Yolk()
open inner class Yolk {
init { trace("Egg.Yolk()") }
open fun f() { trace("Egg.Yolk.f()") }
}
init { trace("New Egg()") }
fun insertYolk(y: Yolk) { yolk = y }
fun g() { yolk.f() }
}
class BigEgg : Egg() {
inner class Yolk : Egg.Yolk() {
init { trace("BigEgg.Yolk()") }
override fun f() {
trace("BigEgg.Yolk.f()")
}
}
init { insertYolk(Yolk()) }
}
fun main() {
BigEgg().g()
trace eq """
Egg.Yolk()
New Egg()
Egg.Yolk()
BigEgg.Yolk()
BigEgg.Yolk.f()

}

"""

BigEgg.Yolk explicitly names Egg.Yolk as its base class, and overrides its
f() member function. The function insertYolk() allows BigEgg to upcast
one of its own Yolk objects into the yolk reference in Egg, so when g()
calls yolk.f(), the overridden version of f() is used. The second call to
Egg.Yolk() is the base-class constructor call of the BigEgg.Yolk
constructor. You can see that the overridden version of f() is used when
g() is called.

As a review of object construction, study the trace output until it makes
sense.

Local & Anonymous Inner Classes
Classes defined inside member functions are called local inner classes.
These can also be created anonymously, using an object expression, or
using a SAM conversion. In all cases, the inner keyword is not used, but is
implied:
// InnerClasses/LocalInnerClasses.kt
package innerclasses
import atomictest.eq
fun interface Pet {
fun speak(): String
}
object CreatePet {
fun home() = " home!"
fun dog(): Pet {
val say = "Bark"
// Local inner class:
class Dog : Pet {
override fun speak() = say + home()
}
return Dog()
}
fun cat(): Pet {
val emit = "Meow"
// Anonymous inner class:
return object: Pet {
override fun speak() = emit + home()
}
}
fun hamster(): Pet {
val squeak = "Squeak"
// SAM conversion:
return Pet { squeak + home() }

}

}

fun main() {
CreatePet.dog().speak() eq "Bark home!"
CreatePet.cat().speak() eq "Meow home!"
CreatePet.hamster().speak() eq "Squeak home!"
}

A local inner class has access to other elements in the function as well as
elements in the outer-class object, thus say, emit, squeak and home() are
available within speak().
You can identify an anonymous inner class because it uses an object
expression, which you see in cat(). It returns an object of a class inherited
from Pet that overrides speak(). Anonymous inner classes are smaller and
more straightforward and do not create a named class that will only be used
in one place. Even more compact is a SAM conversion, as seen in
hamster().
Because inner classes keep a reference to the outer-class object, local inner
classes can access all members of the enclosing class:
// InnerClasses/CounterFactory.kt
package innerclasses
import atomictest.*
fun interface Counter {
fun next(): Int
}
object CounterFactory {
private var count = 0
fun new(name: String): Counter {
// Local inner class:
class Local : Counter {
init { trace("Local()") }
override fun next(): Int {
// Access local identifiers:
trace("$name $count")
return count++
}
}
return Local()
}
fun new2(name: String): Counter {
// Instance of an anonymous inner class:
return object: Counter {
init { trace("Counter()") }
override fun next(): Int {
trace("$name $count")
return count++

}

}

}

}
fun new3(name: String): Counter {
trace("Counter()")
return Counter { // SAM conversion
trace("$name $count")
count++
}
}

fun main() {
fun test(counter: Counter) {
(0..3).forEach { counter.next() }
}
test(CounterFactory.new("Local"))
test(CounterFactory.new2("Anon"))
test(CounterFactory.new3("SAM"))
trace eq """
Local() Local 0 Local 1 Local 2 Local 3
Counter() Anon 4 Anon 5 Anon 6 Anon 7
Counter() SAM 8 SAM 9 SAM 10 SAM 11
"""
}

A Counter keeps track of a count and returns the next Int value. new(),
new2() and new3() each create a different implementation of the Counter
interface. new() returns an instance of a named inner class, new2() returns
an instance of an anonymous inner class, and new3() uses a SAM
conversion to create an anonymous object. All the resulting Counter objects
have implicit access to the elements of the outer object, thus they are inner
classes and not just nested classes. You can see from the output that count
in CounterFactory is shared by all Counter objects.
SAM conversions are limited—for example, they do not support init
clauses.
In Kotlin, files can contain multiple top-level classes and functions.
Because of this, there’s rarely a need for local classes, so if you do need
them they should be basic and straightforward. For example, it’s reasonable
to create a simple data class that’s only used inside a function. If a local
class becomes complex, you should probably take it out of the function and
make it a regular class.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Companion Objects
Member functions act on particular instances of a class. Some
functions aren’t “about” an object, so they don’t need to be tied to that
object.
Functions and fields inside companion objects are about the class. Regular
class elements can access the elements of the companion object, but the
companion object elements cannot access the regular class elements.
As you saw in Objects, it’s possible to define a regular object inside a
class, but that doesn’t provide an association between the object and the
class. In particular, you’re forced to explicitly name the nested object when
you refer to its members. If you define a companion object inside a class, its
elements become transparently available to that class:
// CompanionObjects/CompanionObject.kt
package companionobjects
import atomictest.eq
class WithCompanion {
companion object {
val i = 3
fun f() = i * 3
}
fun g() = i + f()
}
fun WithCompanion.Companion.h() = f() * i
fun main() {
val wc = WithCompanion()
wc.g() eq 12
WithCompanion.i eq 3
WithCompanion.f() eq 9
WithCompanion.h() eq 27
}

Outside the class, you access members of the companion object using the
class name, as in WithCompanion.i and WithCompanion.f(). Other
members of the class can access the companion object elements without
qualification, as you see in the definition of g().

h() is an extension function to the companion object.

If a function doesn’t require access to private class members, you can
choose to define it at file scope rather than putting it in a companion object.
Only one companion object is allowed per class. For clarity, you can give
the companion object a name:
// CompanionObjects/NamingCompanionObjects.kt
package companionobjects
import atomictest.eq
class WithNamed {
companion object Named {
fun s() = "from Named"
}
}
class WithDefault {
companion object {
fun s() = "from Default"
}
}
fun main() {
WithNamed.s() eq "from Named"
WithNamed.Named.s() eq "from Named"
WithDefault.s() eq "from Default"
// The default name is "Companion":
WithDefault.Companion.s() eq "from Default"
}

Even when you name the companion object you can still access its elements
without using the name. If you don’t give the companion object a name,
Kotlin assigns it the name Companion.
If you create a property inside a companion object, it produces a single
piece of storage for that field, shared with all instances of the associated
class:
// CompanionObjects/ObjectProperty.kt
package companionobjects
import atomictest.eq
class WithObjectProperty {
companion object {
private var n: Int = 0 // Only one
}
fun increment() = ++n
}

fun main() {
val a = WithObjectProperty()
val b = WithObjectProperty()
a.increment() eq 1
b.increment() eq 2
a.increment() eq 3
}

The tests in main() show that n has only a single piece of storage, no matter
how many instances of WithObjectProperty are created. a and b both
access the same memory for n.
increment() shows that you can access private members of the
companion object from its surrounding class.

When a function is only accessing properties in the companion object, it
makes sense to move that function inside the companion object:
// CompanionObjects/ObjectFunctions.kt
package companionobjects
import atomictest.eq
class CompanionObjectFunction {
companion object {
private var n: Int = 0
fun increment() = ++n
}
}
fun main() {
CompanionObjectFunction.increment() eq 1
CompanionObjectFunction.increment() eq 2
}

You no longer need a CompanionObjectFunction instance to call
increment().
Suppose you’d like to keep a count of every object you create, to give each
one a unique readable identifier:
// CompanionObjects/ObjectCounter.kt
package companionobjects
import atomictest.eq
class Counted {
companion object {
private var count = 0
}
private val id = count++
override fun toString() = "#$id"
}

fun main() {
List(4) { Counted() } eq "[#0, #1, #2, #3]"
}

A companion object can be an instance of a class defined elsewhere:
// CompanionObjects/CompanionInstance.kt
package companionobjects
import atomictest.*
interface ZI {
fun f(): String
fun g(): String
}
open class ZIOpen : ZI {
override fun f() = "ZIOpen.f()"
override fun g() = "ZIOpen.g()"
}
class ZICompanion {
companion object: ZIOpen()
fun u() = trace("${f()} ${g()}")
}
class ZICompanionInheritance {
companion object: ZIOpen() {
override fun g() =
"ZICompanionInheritance.g()"
fun h() = "ZICompanionInheritance.h()"
}
fun u() = trace("${f()} ${g()} ${h()}")
}
class ZIClass {
companion object: ZI {
override fun f() = "ZIClass.f()"
override fun g() = "ZIClass.g()"
}
fun u() = trace("${f()} ${g()}")
}
fun main() {
ZIClass.f()
ZIClass.g()
ZIClass().u()
ZICompanion.f()
ZICompanion.g()
ZICompanion().u()
ZICompanionInheritance.f()
ZICompanionInheritance.g()
ZICompanionInheritance().u()
trace eq """
ZIClass.f() ZIClass.g()
ZIOpen.f() ZIOpen.g()
ZIOpen.f()
ZICompanionInheritance.g()
ZICompanionInheritance.h()

}

"""

ZICompanion uses a ZIOpen object as its companion object, and
ZICompanionInheritance creates a ZIOpen object while overriding and
extending ZIOpen. ZIClass shows that you can implement an interface

while creating the companion object.

If the class you want to use as a companion object is not open, you cannot
use it directly as we did above. However, if that class implements an
interface you can still use it via Class Delegation:
// CompanionObjects/CompanionDelegation.kt
package companionobjects
import atomictest.*
class ZIClosed : ZI {
override fun f() = "ZIClosed.f()"
override fun g() = "ZIClosed.g()"
}
class ZIDelegation {
companion object: ZI by ZIClosed()
fun u() = trace("${f()} ${g()}")
}
class ZIDelegationInheritance {
companion object: ZI by ZIClosed() {
override fun g() =
"ZIDelegationInheritance.g()"
fun h() =
"ZIDelegationInheritance.h()"
}
fun u() = trace("${f()} ${g()} ${h()}")
}
fun main() {
ZIDelegation.f()
ZIDelegation.g()
ZIDelegation().u()
ZIDelegationInheritance.f()
ZIDelegationInheritance.g()
ZIDelegationInheritance().u()
trace eq """
ZIClosed.f() ZIClosed.g()
ZIClosed.f()
ZIDelegationInheritance.g()
ZIDelegationInheritance.h()
"""
}

ZIDelegationInheritance shows that you can take the non-open class
ZIClosed, delegate it, then override and extend that delegate. Delegation

forwards the methods of an interface to the instance that provides an
implementation. Even if the class of that instance is final, we can still
override and add methods to the delegation receiver.
Here’s a small brain-teaser:
// CompanionObjects/DelegateAndExtend.kt
package companionobjects
import atomictest.eq
interface Extended: ZI {
fun u(): String
}
class Extend : ZI by Companion, Extended {
companion object: ZI {
override fun f() = "Extend.f()"
override fun g() = "Extend.g()"
}
override fun u() = "${f()} ${g()}"
}
private fun test(e: Extended): String {
e.f()
e.g()
return e.u()
}
fun main() {
test(Extend()) eq "Extend.f() Extend.g()"
}

In Extend, the ZI interface is implemented using its own companion
object, which has the default name Companion. But we are also
implementing the Extended interface, which is the ZI interface plus an extra
function u(). The ZI portion of Extended is already implemented, via
Companion, so we only need to override the additional function u() to
complete Extend. Now an Extend object can be upcast to Extended as the
argument to test().
A common use for a companion object is controlling object creation—this
is the Factory Method pattern. Suppose you’d like to only allow the
creation of Lists of Numbered2 objects, and not individual Numbered2
objects:
// CompanionObjects/CompanionFactory.kt
package companionobjects
import atomictest.eq

class Numbered2
private constructor(private val id: Int) {
override fun toString(): String = "#$id"
companion object Factory {
fun create(size: Int) =
List(size) { Numbered2(it) }
}
}
fun main() {
Numbered2.create(0) eq "[]"
Numbered2.create(5) eq
"[#0, #1, #2, #3, #4]"
}

The Numbered2 constructor is private. This means there’s only one way to
create an instance—via the create() factory function. A factory function
can sometimes solve problems that regular constructors cannot.
Constructors in companion objects are initialized when the enclosing class
is instantiated for the first time in a program:
// CompanionObjects/Initialization.kt
package companionobjects
import atomictest.*
class CompanionInit {
companion object {
init {
trace("Companion Constructor")
}
}
}
fun main() {
trace("Before")
CompanionInit()
trace("After 1")
CompanionInit()
trace("After 2")
CompanionInit()
trace("After 3")
trace eq """
Before
Companion Constructor
After 1
After 2
After 3
"""
}

You can see from the output that the companion object is constructed only
once, the first time a CompanionInit() object is created.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

SECTION VI: PREVENTING FAILURE
If debugging is the process of removing software bugs, then
programming must be the process of putting them in.—Edsger
Dijkstra

Exception Handling
Failure is always a possibility.
Kotlin finds basic errors when it analyzes your program. Errors that cannot
be detected at compile time must be dealt with at runtime. In Exceptions,
you learned to throw exceptions. In this atom, we catch exceptions.
Historically, failures were often disastrous. For example, programs written
in the C language would simply stop working, lose their data, and
potentially crash the operating system.
Improved error handling is a powerful way to increase code reliability.
Error handling is especially important when creating reusable program
components. To create a robust system, each component must be robust.
With consistent error handling, components can reliably communicate
problems to client code.
Modern applications often use concurrency, and a concurrent program must
survive non-critical exceptions. A server, for example, should recover when
an open session is terminated via an exception.
Exceptions conflate three activities:
1. Error reporting
2. Recovery
3. Resource cleanup
Let’s consider each one.

Reporting
Standard library exceptions are often adequate. For more specific exception
handling, you can inherit new exception types from Exception or a
subtype:

// ExceptionHandling/DefiningExceptions.kt
package exceptionhandling
import atomictest.*
class Exception1(
val value: Int
): Exception("wrong value: $value")
open class Exception2(
description: String
): Exception(description)
class Exception3(
description: String
): Exception2(description)
fun main() {
capture {
throw Exception1(13)
} eq "Exception1: wrong value: 13"
capture {
throw Exception3("error")
} eq "Exception3: error"
}

A throw expression, as in main(), requires an instance of a Throwable
subtype. To define new exception types, inherit Exception (which extends
Throwable). Both Exception1 and Exception2 inherit Exception, while
Exception3 inherits Exception2.

Recovery
The ambition of exception handling is recovery. This means that you fix the
problem, return the program to a stable state, and resume execution.
Recovery often includes logging information about the error.
Quite often, recovery isn’t possible. An exception might represent an
unrecoverable program failure, either a coding error or something
uncontrollable in the environment.
When an exception is thrown, the exception-handling mechanism looks for
an appropriate place to continue execution. An exception keeps moving out
to higher levels, from function1() that threw the exception, to
function2() that calls function1(), to function3() that calls
function2(), and so on until reaching main(). A matching handler catches
the exception. This stops the search and runs that handler. If the program
never finds a matching handler, it terminates with a console stack trace.

// ExceptionHandling/Stacktrace.kt
package stacktrace
import exceptionhandling.Exception1
fun function1(): Int =
throw Exception1(-52)
fun function2() = function1()
fun function3() = function2()
fun main() {
// function3()
}

Uncommenting the call to function3() produces the following stack trace:
Exception in thread "main" exceptionhandling.Exception1: wrong value: -\
52
at stacktrace.StacktraceKt.function1(Stacktrace.kt:6)
at stacktrace.StacktraceKt.function2(Stacktrace.kt:8)
at stacktrace.StacktraceKt.function3(Stacktrace.kt:10)
at stacktrace.StacktraceKt.main(Stacktrace.kt:13)
at stacktrace.StacktraceKt.main(Stacktrace.kt)

Any of function1(), function2() or function3() can catch the
exception and handle it, preventing the exception from terminating the
program.
An exception handler is the catch keyword followed by a parameter list
containing the exception you’re handling. This is followed by a block of
code implementing the recovery.
In the following example, the function toss() produces different
exceptions for arguments 1-3, otherwise it returns “OK”. test() contains a
complete set of handlers for the toss() function:
// ExceptionHandling/Handlers.kt
package exceptionhandling
import atomictest.eq
fun toss(which: Int) = when (which) {
1 -> throw Exception1(1)
2 -> throw Exception2("Exception 2")
3 -> throw Exception3("Exception 3")
else -> "OK"
}
fun test(which: Int): Any? =
try {
toss(which)
} catch (e: Exception1) {

e.value
} catch (e: Exception3) {
e.message
} catch (e: Exception2) {
e.message
}
fun main() {
test(0) eq "OK"
test(1) eq 1
test(2) eq "Exception 2"
test(3) eq "Exception 3"
}

When you call toss() you must catch all relevant toss() exceptions,
allowing non-relevant exceptions to “bubble up” and be caught elsewhere.
The entire try-catch in test() is a single expression: it returns either the
last expression of the try body or the last expression of the catch clause
matching an exception. If no catch handles the exception, that exception is
thrown further up the stack. If uncaught, it generates a stack trace.
Because Exception3 extends Exception2, an Exception3 is handled as an
Exception2 if Exception2’s catch appears in the sequence of handlers
before Exception3’s catch:
// ExceptionHandling/Hierarchy.kt
package exceptionhandling
import atomictest.eq
fun testCatchOrder(which: Int) =
try {
toss(which)
} catch (e: Exception2) {
// [1]
"Handler for Exception2 got ${e.message}"
} catch (e: Exception3) {
// [2]
"Handler for Exception3 got ${e.message}"
}
fun main() {
testCatchOrder(2) eq
"Handler for Exception2 got Exception 2"
testCatchOrder(3) eq
"Handler for Exception2 got Exception 3"
}

The catch-clause order means an Exception3 is caught by line [1], despite
the more specific type of exception handler in line [2].

Exception Subtypes

In testCode(), an incorrect code argument throws an
IllegalArgumentException:
// ExceptionHandling/LibraryException.kt
package exceptionhandling
import atomictest.*
fun testCode(code: Int) {
if (code <= 1000) {
throw IllegalArgumentException(
"'code' must be > 1000: $code")
}
}
fun main() {
try {
// A1 is 161 in base-16 (hex) notation:
testCode("A1".toInt(16))
} catch (e: IllegalArgumentException) {
e.message eq
"'code' must be > 1000: 161"
}
try {
testCode("0".toInt(1))
} catch (e: IllegalArgumentException) {
e.message eq
"radix 1 was not in valid range 2..36"
}
}

An IllegalArgumentException is thrown by both testCode() and the
library function toInt(radix). This results in the somewhat confusing
error messages in main(). The problem is that we are using the same
exception to represent two different issues. We solve it by throwing a new
exception type called IncorrectInputException for our error:
// ExceptionHandling/NewException.kt
package exceptionhandling
import atomictest.eq
class IncorrectInputException(
message: String
): Exception(message)
fun checkCode(code: Int) {
if (code <= 1000) {
throw IncorrectInputException(
"Code must be > 1000: $code")
}
}
fun main() {
try {
checkCode("A1".toInt(16))
} catch (e: IncorrectInputException) {

}

e.message eq "Code must be > 1000: 161"
} catch (e: IllegalArgumentException) {
"Produces error" eq "if it gets here"
}
try {
checkCode("1".toInt(1))
} catch (e: IncorrectInputException) {
"Produces error" eq "if it gets here"
} catch (e: IllegalArgumentException) {
e.message eq
"radix 1 was not in valid range 2..36"
}

Now each issue has its own handler.
Resist creating too many exception types. As a rule of thumb, use different
exception types to distinguish different handling schemes, and use different
constructor parameters to provide details for a particular handling scheme.

Resource Cleanup
When failure is inevitable, automatic resource cleanup helps other parts of
the program to continue running safely.
finally ensures resource cleanup during exception handling. A finally
clause always runs, regardless of whether you leave a try block normally or

exceptionally:

// ExceptionHandling/TryFinally.kt
package exceptionhandling
import atomictest.*
fun checkValue(value: Int) {
try {
trace(value)
if (value <= 0)
throw IllegalArgumentException(
"value must be positive: $value")
} finally {
trace("In finally clause for $value")
}
}
fun main() {
listOf(10, -10).forEach {
try {
checkValue(it)
} catch (e: IllegalArgumentException) {
trace("In catch clause for main()")
trace(e.message)
}

}

}
trace eq """
10
In finally clause for 10
-10
In finally clause for -10
In catch clause for main()
value must be positive: -10
"""

finally works even with intermediate catch clauses. For example, suppose

a switch must be turned off when you’re done with it:
// ExceptionHandling/GuaranteedCleanup.kt
package exceptionhandling
import atomictest.eq
data class Switch(
var on: Boolean = false,
var result: String = "OK"
)
fun testFinally(i: Int): Switch {
val sw = Switch()
try {
sw.on = true
when (i) {
0 -> throw IllegalStateException()
1 -> return sw
// [1]
}
} catch (e: IllegalStateException) {
sw.result = "exception"
} finally {
sw.on = false
}
return sw
}
fun main() {
testFinally(0) eq
"Switch(on=false, result=exception)"
testFinally(1) eq
"Switch(on=false, result=OK)"
// [2]
testFinally(2) eq
"Switch(on=false, result=OK)"
}

Even if we return inside a try ([1]), the finally clause still runs ([2]).
Whether testFinally() completes normally or with an exception, the
finally clause always executes.

Exception Handling in AtomicTest

This book uses AtomicTest’s capture() to ensure that expected exceptions
are thrown. capture() takes a function argument and returns a
CapturedException object containing the exception class and error
message:
// ExceptionHandling/CaptureImplementation.kt
package exceptionhandling
import atomictest.CapturedException
fun capture(f:() -> Unit): CapturedException =
try {
// [1]
f()
CapturedException(null,
"<Error>: Expected an exception") // [2]
} catch (e: Throwable) {
// [3]
CapturedException(e::class,
// [4]
if (e.message != null) ": ${e.message}"
else "")
}
fun main() {
capture {
throw Exception("!!!")
} eq "Exception: !!!"
// [5]
capture {
1
} eq "<Error>: Expected an exception"
}

capture() calls its function argument f within a try block ([1]), handling
all possible exceptions by catching Throwable ([3]). If no exception is
thrown, the CapturedException message indicates that an exception was
expected ([2]). If an exception is caught, the returned CapturedException
contains the exception class and a message ([4]). A CapturedException can
be compared to a String using eq ([5]).

Ordinarily you won’t catch Throwable, but will process each specific
exception type.

Guidelines
Recovering from exceptions turns out to be remarkably rare, considering
that recovery was the original intent. The primary purpose of exceptions in
Kotlin is to discover program bugs, not recovery. Catching exceptions in
ordinary Kotlin code is thus a “code smell.”
Here are guidelines for programming with exceptions in Kotlin:

1. Logic Errors: These are bugs in your code. Either don’t catch them at
all (and produce a stack trace), or catch them at the top level of your
application and report the bugs, possibly restarting the affected
operation.
2. Data Errors: These are errors from bad data that the programmer
cannot control. The application must somehow deal with the problem
without blaming it on program logic. For example, we’ve used
String.toInt() this atom, which throws an exception for an
inappropriate String. It also has a companion String.toIntOrNull()
that produces a null upon failure so you can use it in an expression
such as val n = string.toIntOrNull() ?: default.
The Kotlin library is designed around dealing with a bad result by
returning a null instead of throwing an exception. Operations that are
expected to occasionally fail will usually have an “OrNull” version
that you can use instead of the exception version.
3. Check instructions test for logic errors. These produce exceptions
when they find a bug, but they look like function calls so you don’t
explicitly throw exceptions in your code.
4. Input/Output Errors: These are external conditions that you can’t
control and you can’t ignore. However, using the “OrNull” approach
rapidly obscures the understandability of the code. More importantly,
you often can recover from I/O errors, typically by retrying the
operation. Thus, I/O operations in Kotlin throw exceptions, so you’ll
have code in your applications that handle those and attempt to recover
from them.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Check Instructions
Check instructions assert that constraints are satisfied. They are
commonly used to validate function arguments and results.
Check instructions discover programming errors by expressing non-obvious
requirements. They can also act as documentation for future readers of that
code. You’ll usually find check instructions at the beginning of a function,
to ensure that the arguments are legitimate, and at the end, to check the
function’s calculations.
Check instructions typically throw exceptions when they fail. You can
usually use check instructions instead of explicitly throwing exceptions.
Check instructions are easier to write and think about, and produce more
comprehensible code. Use them whenever possible to test and illuminate
your programs.
require()

Design By Contract preconditions guarantee initialization constraints.
Kotlin’s require() is normally used to validate function arguments, so it
typically appears at the beginning of function bodies. These tests cannot be
checked at compile time. Preconditions are relatively easy to include in
your code, but sometimes they can be turned into unit tests.
Consider a numerical field representing a month on the Julian calendar. You
know this value must always be in the range 1..12. A precondition reports
an error if the value falls outside that range:
// CheckInstructions/JulianMonth.kt
package checkinstructions
import atomictest.*
data class Month(val monthNumber: Int) {
init {
require(monthNumber in 1..12) {
"Month out of range: $monthNumber"
}

}

}

fun main() {
Month(1) eq "Month(monthNumber=1)"
capture { Month(13) } eq
"IllegalArgumentException: " +
"Month out of range: 13"
}

We perform the require() inside the constructor. require() throws an
IllegalArgumentException if its condition isn’t satisfied. You can always
use require() instead of throwing IllegalArgumentException.
The second parameter for require() is a lambda that produces a String. If
the String requires construction, that overhead doesn’t occur unless
require() fails.
When the arguments for Quadratic.kt from Summary 2 are inappropriate,
it throws IllegalArgumentException. We can simplify the code using
require():
// CheckInstructions/QuadraticRequire.kt
package checkinstructions
import kotlin.math.sqrt
import atomictest.*
class Roots(
val root1: Double,
val root2: Double
)
fun quadraticZeroes(
a: Double,
b: Double,
c: Double
): Roots {
require(a != 0.0) { "a is zero" }
val underRadical = b * b - 4 * a * c
require(underRadical >= 0) {
"Negative underRadical: $underRadical"
}
val squareRoot = sqrt(underRadical)
val root1 = (-b - squareRoot) / 2 * a
val root2 = (-b + squareRoot) / 2 * a
return Roots(root1, root2)
}
fun main() {
capture {
quadraticZeroes(0.0, 4.0, 5.0)
} eq "IllegalArgumentException: " +
"a is zero"
capture {

}

quadraticZeroes(3.0, 4.0, 5.0)
} eq "IllegalArgumentException: " +
"Negative underRadical: -44.0"
val roots = quadraticZeroes(3.0, 8.0, 5.0)
roots.root1 eq -15.0
roots.root2 eq -9.0

This code is much clearer and cleaner than the original Quadratic.kt.
The following DataFile class allows us to work with files regardless of
whether the examples run in the IDE via the AtomicKotlin course or in the
standalone build for the book. All DataFile objects store their files in the
targetDir subdirectory:
// CheckInstructions/DataFile.kt
package checkinstructions
import atomictest.eq
import java.io.File
import java.nio.file.Paths
val targetDir = File("DataFiles")
class DataFile(val fileName: String) :
File(targetDir, fileName) {
init {
if (!targetDir.exists())
targetDir.mkdir()
}
fun erase() { if (exists()) delete() }
fun reset(): File {
erase()
createNewFile()
return this
}
}
fun main() {
DataFile("Test.txt").reset() eq
Paths.get("DataFiles", "Test.txt")
.toString()
}

A DataFile manipulates the underlying file in the operating system to write
and read that file. The base class for DataFile is java.io.File, which is
one of the oldest classes in the Java library; it appeared in the first version
of the language, back when they thought it was a great idea to use the same
class (File) to represent both files and directories. Kotlin can effortlessly
inherit File, despite its antiquity.

During construction, we create targetDir if it doesn’t exist. The erase()
function deletes the file, while reset() deletes the file and creates a new,
empty file.
The Java standard library Paths class contains only an overloaded get().
The version of get() we want takes any number of Strings and builds a
Path object, representing a directory path that is independent of the
operating system.
Opening a file often has a number of preconditions, usually involving file
paths, naming, and contents. Consider a function that opens and reads a file
with a name beginning with file_. Using require(), we verify that the file
name is correct and that the file exists and is not empty:
// CheckInstructions/GetTrace.kt
package checkinstructions
import atomictest.*
fun getTrace(fileName: String): List<String> {
require(fileName.startsWith("file_")) {
"$fileName must start with 'file_'"
}
val file = DataFile(fileName)
require(file.exists()) {
"$fileName doesn't exist"
}
val lines = file.readLines()
require(lines.isNotEmpty()) {
"$fileName is empty"
}
return lines
}
fun main() {
DataFile("file_empty.txt").writeText("")
DataFile("file_wubba.txt").writeText(
"wubba lubba dub dub")
capture {
getTrace("wrong_name.txt")
} eq "IllegalArgumentException: " +
"wrong_name.txt must start with 'file_'"
capture {
getTrace("file_nonexistent.txt")
} eq "IllegalArgumentException: " +
"file_nonexistent.txt doesn't exist"
capture {
getTrace("file_empty.txt")
} eq "IllegalArgumentException: " +
"file_empty.txt is empty"
getTrace("file_wubba.txt") eq
"[wubba lubba dub dub]"
}

We’ve been using the two-parameter version of require(), but there’s also
a single-parameter version that produces a default message:
// CheckInstructions/SingleArgRequire.kt
package checkinstructions
import atomictest.*
fun singleArgRequire(arg: Int): Int {
require(arg > 5)
return arg
}
fun main() {
capture {
singleArgRequire(5)
} eq "IllegalArgumentException: " +
"Failed requirement."
singleArgRequire(6) eq 6
}

The failure message is not as explicit as the two-parameter version, but in
some cases it is sufficient.
requireNotNull()
requireNotNull() tests its first argument and returns that argument if it is
not null. Otherwise, it produces an IllegalArgumentException.

Upon success, requireNotNull()’s argument is automatically smart-cast to
a non-nullable type. Thus, you usually don’t need requireNotNull()’s
return value:
// CheckInstructions/RequireNotNull.kt
package checkinstructions
import atomictest.*
fun notNull(n: Int?): Int {
requireNotNull(n) {
// [1]
"notNull() argument cannot be null"
}
return n * 9
// [2]
}
fun main() {
val n: Int? = null
capture {
notNull(n)
} eq "IllegalArgumentException: " +
"notNull() argument cannot be null"
capture {
// [3]
requireNotNull(n)
} eq "IllegalArgumentException: " +

}

"Required value was null."
notNull(11) eq 99

[2] Notice that n no longer requires a null check, because the call to
requireNotNull() has made it non-nullable.
As with require(), there’s a two-parameter version with a message you
can craft yourself ([1]), and a single-parameter version with a default
message ([3]). Because requireNotNull() tests for a specific issue
(nullity), the single-parameter version is more useful than it is with
require().
check()

A design-by-contract postcondition tests the results of a function.
Postconditions are important for long, complex functions where you might
not trust the results. Whenever you can describe constraints on the results of
a function, it’s wise to express them as a postcondition.
check() is identical to require() except that it throws
IllegalStateException. It is typically used at the end of a function, to

verify that the results (or the fields in the function’s object) are valid—that
things haven’t somehow gotten into a bad state.
Suppose a complex function writes to a file, and you are unsure whether all
execution paths will create that file. Adding a postcondition at the end of
the function helps ensure correctness:
// CheckInstructions/Postconditions.kt
package checkinstructions
import atomictest.*
val resultFile = DataFile("Results.txt")
fun createResultFile(create: Boolean) {
if (create)
resultFile.writeText("Results\n# ok")
// ... other execution paths
check(resultFile.exists()) {
"${resultFile.name} doesn't exist!"
}
}
fun main() {
resultFile.erase()

}

capture {
createResultFile(false)
} eq "IllegalStateException: " +
"Results.txt doesn't exist!"
createResultFile(true)

Assuming your preconditions ensure valid arguments, a postcondition
failure almost always indicates a programming error. For this reason, you’ll
see postconditions less often because, once the programmer is convinced
the code is correct, the postcondition can be commented or removed if it
impacts performance. Of course, it’s always best to leave such tests in place
so problems caused by future code changes are immediately detected. One
way to do this is by moving postconditions into unit tests.
assert()

To avoid commenting and uncommenting check() statements, assert()
allows you to enable and disable assert() checks.
assert() comes from Java. Assertions are disabled by default, and are only

engaged if you explicitly turn them on using a command-line flag. In
Kotlin, this flag is -ea.

We recommend using require() and check(), which are always available
without special configuration.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

The Nothing Type
A Nothing return type indicates a function that never returns
This is usually a function that always throws an exception.
Here’s a function that produces an infinite loop (avoid these)—because it
never returns, its return type is Nothing:
// NothingType/InfiniteLoop.kt
package nothingtype
fun infinite(): Nothing {
while (true) {}
}

Nothing is a built-in Kotlin type with no instances.

A practical example is the built-in TODO(), which has a return type of
Nothing and throws NotImplementedError:
// NothingType/Todo.kt
package nothingtype
import atomictest.*
fun later(s: String): String = TODO("later()")
fun later2(s: String): Int = TODO()
fun main() {
capture {
later("Hello")
} eq "NotImplementedError: " +
"An operation is not implemented: later()"
capture {
later2("Hello!")
} eq "NotImplementedError: " +
"An operation is not implemented."
}

Both later() and later2() return non-Nothing types even though TODO()
returns Nothing. Nothing is compatible with any type.

later() and later2() compile successfully. If you call either one, an
exception reminds you to write implementations. TODO() is a useful tool for

“sketching” a code framework to verify that everything fits together before
filling in the details.

In the following, fail() always throws an Exception so it returns Nothing.
Notice that a call to fail() is more readable and compact than explicitly
throwing an exception:
// NothingType/Fail.kt
package nothingtype
import atomictest.*
fun fail(i: Int): Nothing =
throw Exception("fail($i)")
fun main() {
capture {
fail(1)
} eq "Exception: fail(1)"
capture {
fail(2)
} eq "Exception: fail(2)"
}

fail() allows you to easily change the error-handling strategy. For

example, you can change the exception type or log an additional message
before throwing an exception.
This throws a BadData exception if the argument is not a String:
// NothingType/CheckObject.kt
package nothingtype
import atomictest.*
class BadData(m: String) : Exception(m)
fun checkObject(obj: Any?): String =
if (obj is String)
obj
else
throw BadData("Needs String, got $obj")
fun test(checkObj: (obj: Any?) -> String) {
checkObj("abc") eq "abc"
capture {
checkObj(null)
} eq "BadData: Needs String, got null"
capture {
checkObj(123)
} eq "BadData: Needs String, got 123"
}

fun main() {
test(::checkObject)
}

checkObject()’s return type is the return type of the if expression. Kotlin
treats a throw as type Nothing, and Nothing can be assigned to any type. In
checkObject(), String takes priority over Nothing, so the type of the if
expression is String.

We can rewrite checkObject() using a safe cast and an Elvis operator.
checkObject2() casts obj to a String if it can be cast, otherwise it throws
an exception:
// NothingType/CheckObject2.kt
package nothingtype
fun failWithBadData(obj: Any?): Nothing =
throw BadData("Needs String, got $obj")
fun checkObject2(obj: Any?): String =
(obj as? String) ?: failWithBadData(obj)
fun main() {
test(::checkObject2)
}

When given a plain null with no additional type information, the compiler
infers a nullable Nothing:
// NothingType/ListOfNothing.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val none: Nothing? = null

}

var nullableString: String? = null
nullableString = "abc"
nullableString = none
nullableString eq null

// [1]

val nullableInt: Int? = none
nullableInt eq null

// [3]

// [2]

val listNone: List<Nothing?> = listOf(null)
val ints: List<Int?> = listOf(null)
// [4]
ints eq listNone

You can assign both null and none to a var or val of a nullable type, such
as nullableString or nullableInt. This is allowed because the type of

both null and none is Nothing? (nullable Nothing). In the same way that
an expression of the Nothing type (for example, fail()) can be interpreted
as “any type,” an expression of the Nothing? type, such as null, can be
interpreted as “any nullable type.” Assignments to different nullable types
are shown in lines [1], [2] and [3].
listNone is initialized with a List containing only the null value. The
compiler infers this to be List<Nothing?>. For this reason, you must
explicitly specify the element type ([4]) that you want to store in the List
when you initialize it with only null.

Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Resource Cleanup
Using try-finally blocks for resource cleanup is tedious and errorprone. Kotlin’s library functions manage cleanup for you.
As you learned in Exception Handling, the finally clause cleans up
resources regardless of how the try block exits. But what if an exception
can happen while closing a resource? You end up with another try inside
the finally clause. On top of that, if one exception is thrown inside a try
and another while closing the resource, the latter shouldn’t conceal the
former. Ensuring proper cleanup becomes very messy.
To reduce this complexity, Kotlin’s use() guarantees proper cleanup of
closeable resources, liberating you from handwritten cleanup code.
use() works with any object that implements Java’s AutoCloseable
interface. It executes the code within the block, then calls close() on the

object, regardless of how you exit the block—either normally (including via
return), or through an exception.
use() rethrows all exceptions, so you must still deal with those exceptions.

Predefined classes that work with use() are found in the Java
documentation for AutoCloseable. For example, to read lines from a File
we apply use() to a BufferedReader. DataFile from Check Instructions
inherits java.io.File:
// ResourceCleanup/AutoCloseable.kt
import atomictest.eq
import checkinstructions.DataFile
fun main() {
DataFile("Results.txt")
.bufferedReader()
.use { it.readLines().first() } eq
"Results"
}

useLines() opens a File object, extracts all its lines, and passes those lines

to a target function (typically a lambda):
// ResourceCleanup/UseLines.kt
import atomictest.eq
import checkinstructions.DataFile

fun main() {
DataFile("Results.txt").useLines {
it.filter { "#" in it }.first()
// [1]
} eq "# ok"
DataFile("Results.txt").useLines { lines ->
lines.filter { line ->
// [2]
"#" in line
}.first()
} eq "# ok"
}

[1] The left-hand it refers to the collection of lines in the file, while
the right-hand it refers to each individual line. To reduce confusion,
avoid writing code with two different nearby its.
[2] Named arguments prevent confusion from too many its.
Everything happens within the useLines() lambda; outside the lambda the
file contents are unavailable unless you explicitly return them. As it closes
the file, useLines() returns the result of the lambda.
forEachLine() makes it easy to apply an action to each line in a file:
// ResourceCleanup/ForEachLine.kt
import checkinstructions.DataFile
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
DataFile("Results.txt").forEachLine {
if (it.startsWith("#"))
trace("$it")
}
trace eq "# ok"
}

The lambda in forEachLine() returns Unit, which means that anything you
do with the lines must be achieved through side effects. In functional
programming, we prefer returning results over side effects, and thus
useLines() is a more functional approach than forEachLine(). However,
forEachLine() is a quick solution for simple utilities.

You can create your own class that works with use() by implementing the
AutoCloseable interface, which contains only the close() function:
// ResourceCleanup/Usable.kt
package resourcecleanup
import atomictest.*
class Usable() : AutoCloseable {
fun func() = trace("func()")
override fun close() = trace("close()")
}
fun main() {
Usable().use { it.func() }
trace eq "func() close()"
}

use() ensures resource cleanup at the point the resource is created, rather

than forcing you to write cleanup code when you’re finished with the
resource.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Logging
Logging captures information from a running program.
For example, an installation program might log:
The steps taken during setup.
The directories for file storage.
Startup values for the program.
A web server might log the origin address and status of each request.
Logging is also helpful during debugging. Without logging, you might
decipher the behavior of a program using println() statements. This can
be helpful in the absence of a debugger (such as the one built into IntelliJ
IDEA). However, once you decide the program is working properly, you’ll
probably take the println() statements out. Later, if you run into more
bugs, you might put them back in. In contrast, logging can be dynamically
enabled when you need it, and turned off otherwise.
For some failures you can only report the issue. A program that recovers
from some types of errors (as shown in Exception Handling) can log details
about those errors for later analysis. In a web application, for example, you
don’t terminate the program if something goes wrong. Logging captures
these events, giving programmers and administrators a way to discover the
problems. Meanwhile, the application continues running.
We use an open-source logging package designed for Kotlin called Kotlinlogging, which has the feel and simplicity of Kotlin. Note that there are
other logging packages to choose from.
You must create a logger before using it. You’ll almost always want to
create it at file scope so it’s available to all components in that file:

// Logging/BasicLogging.kt
package logging
import mu.KLogging
private val log = KLogging().logger
fun main() {
val msg = "Hello, Kotlin Logging!"
log.trace(msg)
log.debug(msg)
log.info(msg)
log.warn(msg)
log.error(msg)
}

main() shows the different logging levels: trace(), debug() and info()
capture behavioral information, while warn() and error() indicate

problems.

Start-up configuration determines the logging levels that are actually
reported. This can be modified during execution. Operators of long-running
applications can change the logging level without restarting the program
(which is often unacceptable).
Logging libraries have a rather odd history. People were dissatisfied with
the original logging library distributed with Java, so they created other
libraries. In an attempt to unify logging, designers began developing
common logging interfaces. Acknowledging that organizations may be
invested in existing logging libraries, those interfaces were created as
facades for multiple different logging libraries. Later, other programmers
created (presumably improved) facades over those facades. Utilizing a
logging system often means choosing a facade, then choosing one or more
underlying implementations.
The Kotlin-logging library is a facade over the Simple Logging Facade for
Java (SLF4J), which is an abstraction over multiple logging frameworks.
You choose the framework that meets your needs—although it is more
likely that the operations group in your company will make that decision, as
they are the ones that usually manage logging and analyze the resulting log
files.
For this example we use slf4j-simple as our implementation. This comes
as part of SLF4J and thus we are not required to install or configure an

additional library—some libraries have an annoying amount of setup
complexity. slf4j-simple sends its output to the console error stream.
When you run the program, you see:
[main] INFO mu.KLogging - Hello, Kotlin Logging!
[main] WARN mu.KLogging - Hello, Kotlin Logging!
[main] ERROR mu.KLogging - Hello, Kotlin Logging!

trace() and debug() produce no output because the default configuration

doesn’t report those levels. To get different reporting levels, change your
logging configuration. Logging configuration varies depending on the
logging package you’re using, so we don’t talk about it here.

Logging implementations that log to files often manage those log files by
automatically discarding the oldest parts when files get too large. There are
additional tools designed to read and analyze log files. The practice of
logging can require fairly involved research.
For basic problems, the work of installing, configuring, and using a logging
system might tempt you back to println() statements. Fortunately, there
are easier strategies.
The quick-and-dirty approach is to define a global function. This can easily
be disabled when you don’t need it:
// Logging/SimpleLoggingStrategy.kt
package logging
import checkinstructions.DataFile
val logFile = // Reset ensures an empty file:
DataFile("simpleLogFile.txt").reset()
fun debug(msg: String) =
System.err.println("Debug: $msg")
// To disable:
// fun debug(msg: String) = Unit
fun trace(msg: String) =
logFile.appendText("Trace: $msg\n")
fun main() {
debug("Simple Logging Strategy")
trace("Line 1")
trace("Line 2")
println(logFile.readText())
}
/* Sample Output:
Debug: Simple Logging Strategy

Trace: Line 1
Trace: Line 2
*/

debug() sends its output to the console error stream. trace() sends its

output to a log file.

You can also create your own simple logging class:
// Logging/AtomicLog.kt
package atomiclog
import checkinstructions.DataFile
class Logger(fileName: String) {
val logFile = DataFile(fileName).reset()
private fun log(type: String, msg: String) =
logFile.appendText("$type: $msg\n")
fun trace(msg: String) = log("Trace", msg)
fun debug(msg: String) = log("Debug", msg)
fun info(msg: String) = log("Info", msg)
fun warn(msg: String) = log("Warn", msg)
fun error(msg: String) = log("Error", msg)
// For basic testing:
fun report(msg: String) {
trace(msg)
debug(msg)
info(msg)
warn(msg)
error(msg)
}
}

You can add support for other features like logging levels and time stamps.
Using the library is straightforward:
// Logging/UseAtomicLog.kt
package useatomiclog
import atomiclog.Logger
import atomictest.eq
private val logger = Logger("AtomicLog.txt")
fun main() {
logger.report("Hello, Atomic Log!")
logger.logFile.readText() eq """
Trace: Hello, Atomic Log!
Debug: Hello, Atomic Log!
Info: Hello, Atomic Log!
Warn: Hello, Atomic Log!
Error: Hello, Atomic Log!
"""
}

It’s tempting to create yet another logging library. This is probably not a
good use of time.
Logging is not as simple as calling library functions—there’s a significant
run-time component. Logging is typically included in the deliverable
product, and operations people must be able to turn logging on and off,
dynamically adjust logging levels, and control the logfiles. For longrunning programs such as servers, this last issue is particularly important
because it includes strategies to prevent logfiles from filling up.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Unit Testing
Unit testing is the practice of creating a correctness test for each aspect
of a function. Unit tests rapidly reveal broken code, accelerating
development speed.
There’s far more to testing than we can cover in this book, so this atom is
only a basic introduction.
The “Unit” in “Unit testing” describes a small piece of code, usually a
function, that is tested separately and independently. This should not be
confused with the unrelated Kotlin Unit type.
Unit tests are typically written by the programmer, and run each time you
build the project. Because unit tests run so frequently, they must run
quickly.
You’ve been learning about unit testing while reading this book, via the
AtomicTest library we use to validate the book’s code. AtomicTest uses the
concise eq for the most common pattern in unit testing: comparing an
expected result with a generated result.
Of the numerous unit test frameworks, JUnit is the most popular for Java.
There are also frameworks created specifically for Kotlin. The Kotlin
standard library includes kotlin.test, which provides a facade for
different test libraries. This way you’re not limited to using a particular
library. kotlin.test also contains wrappers for basic assertion functions.
To use kotlin.test, you must modify the dependencies section of your
project’s build.gradle file to include:
testImplementation "org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-test-common"

Inside a unit test, the programmer calls various assertion functions that
validate the expected behavior of the function under test. Assertion

functions include assertEquals(), which compares the actual value against
an expected value, and assertTrue(), which tests its first argument, a
Boolean expression. In this example, the unit tests are the functions with
names beginning with the word test:
// UnitTesting/NoFramework.kt
package unittesting
import kotlin.test.assertEquals
import kotlin.test.assertTrue
import atomictest.*
fun fortyTwo() = 42
fun testFortyTwo(n: Int = 42) {
assertEquals(
expected = n,
actual = fortyTwo(),
message = "Incorrect,")
}
fun allGood(b: Boolean = true) = b
fun testAllGood(b: Boolean = true) {
assertTrue(allGood(b), "Not good")
}
fun main() {
testFortyTwo()
testAllGood()
capture {
testFortyTwo(43)
} contains
listOf("expected:", "<43>",
"but was", "<42>")
capture {
testAllGood(false)
} contains listOf("Error", "Not good")
}

In main(), you can see that a failing assertion function produces an
AssertionError—this means the unit test has failed, signaling the problem
to the programmer.
kotlin.test contains an assortment of functions that have names starting
with assert:
assertEquals(), assertNotEquals()
assertTrue(), assertFalse()
assertNull(), assertNotNull()
assertFails(), assertFailsWith()

Similar functions are typically included in every unit test framework, but
the names and parameter order can be different. For example, the message
parameter in assertEquals() might be first or last. Also, it’s easy to mix
up expected and actual—using named arguments avoids this problem.
The expect() function in kotlin.test runs a block of code and compares
that result with the expected value:
fun <T> expect(
expected: T,
message: String?,
block: () -> T
) {
assertEquals(expected, block(), message)
}

Here’s testFortyTwo() rewritten using expect():
// UnitTesting/UsingExpect.kt
package unittesting
import atomictest.*
import kotlin.test.*
fun testFortyTwo2(n: Int = 42) {
expect(n, "Incorrect,") { fortyTwo() }
}
fun main() {
testFortyTwo2()
capture {
testFortyTwo2(43)
} contains
listOf("expected:",
"<43> but was:", "<42>")
assertFails { testFortyTwo2(43) }
capture {
assertFails { testFortyTwo2() }
} contains
listOf("Expected an exception",
"to be thrown",
"but was completed successfully.")
assertFailsWith<AssertionError> {
testFortyTwo2(43)
}
capture {
assertFailsWith<AssertionError> {
testFortyTwo2()
}
} contains
listOf("Expected an exception",
"to be thrown",
"but was completed successfully.")
}

It’s important to add tests for corner cases. If a function produces an error
under certain conditions, this should be verified with a unit test (as
AtomicTest’s capture() does). assertFails() and assertFailsWith()
ensure that the exception is thrown. assertFailsWith() also checks the
type of the exception.

Test Frameworks
A typical test framework contains a collection of assertion functions and a
mechanism to run tests and display results. Most test runners show results
with green for success and red for failure.
This atom uses JUnit5 as the underlying library for kotlin.test. To
include it in a project, the dependencies section of your build.gradle
should look like this:
testImplementation "org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-test"
testImplementation "org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-test-junit"
testImplementation "org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-test-junit5"
testImplementation "org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter:$junit_version"

If you’re using a different library, you can find setup details in that
framework’s instructions.
kotlin.test provides facades for the most commonly used functions.

Assertions are delegated to the appropriate functions in the underlying test
framework. In the org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions class, for
example, assertEquals() calls Assertions.assertEquals().
Kotlin supports annotations for definitions and expressions. An annotation
is the @ sign followed by the annotation name, and indicates special
treatment for the annotated element. The @Test annotation converts a
regular function into a test function. We can test fortyTwo() and allGood()
using the @Test annotation:
// Tests/unittesting/SampleTest.kt
package unittesting
import kotlin.test.*
class SampleTest {
@Test
fun testFortyTwo() {
expect(42, "Incorrect,") { fortyTwo() }

}

}
@Test
fun testAllGood() {
assertTrue(allGood(), "Not good")
}

kotlin.test uses a typealias to create a facade for the @Test annotation:
typealias Test = org.junit.jupiter.api.Test

This tells the compiler to substitute the @org.junit.jupiter.api.Test
annotation for @Test.
A test class usually contains multiple unit tests. Ideally, each unit test only
verifies a single behavior. This quickly guides you to the problem if a test
fails when introducing new functionality.
@Test functions can be run:

Independently
As part of a class
Together with all tests defined for the application
IntelliJ IDEA allows you to rerun only the failed tests.
Consider a simple state machine with three states: On, Off and Paused. The
functions start(), pause(), resume() and finish() control the state
machine. resume() is valuable because resuming a paused machine is
significantly cheaper and/or faster than starting a machine.
// UnitTesting/StateMachine.kt
package unittesting
import unittesting.State.*
enum class State { On, Off, Paused }
class StateMachine {
var state: State = Off
private set
private fun transition(
new: State, current: State = On
) {
if(new == Off && state != Off)
state = Off
else if(state == current)
state = new

}

}
fun start() = transition(On, Off)
fun pause() = transition(Paused, On)
fun resume() = transition(On, Paused)
fun finish() = transition(Off)

These operations are ignored:
resume() or finish() on a machine that is Off.
pause() or start() on a Paused machine.

To test StateMachine, we create a property sm inside the test class. The test
runner creates a fresh StateMachineTest object for each different test:
// Tests/unittesting/StateMachineTest.kt
package unittesting
import kotlin.test.*
class StateMachineTest {
val sm = StateMachine()
@Test
fun start() {
sm.start()
assertEquals(State.On, sm.state)
}
@Test
fun `pause and resume`() {
sm.start()
sm.pause()
assertEquals(State.Paused, sm.state)
sm.resume()
assertEquals(State.On, sm.state)
sm.pause()
assertEquals(State.Paused, sm.state)
}
// ...
}

Normally, Kotlin only allows letters and digits for function names.
However, if you put a function name inside backticks, you can use any
characters (including whitespaces). This means you can create function
names that are sentences describing their tests, such as pause and resume.
This produces more useful error information.
An essential goal of unit testing is to simplify the gradual development of
complicated software. After introducing each new piece of functionality, a
developer not only adds new tests to check its correctness but also runs all
the existing tests to make sure that the prior functionality still works. You

feel safer when introducing new changes, and the system is more
predictable and stable.
In the process of fixing a new bug, you create additional unit tests for this
and similar cases, so you don’t make the same mistakes in the future.
If you use a continuous integration (CI) server such as Teamcity, all
available tests run automatically and you’re notified if something breaks.
Consider a class with several properties:
// UnitTesting/Learner.kt
package unittesting
enum class Language {
Kotlin, Java, Go, Python, Rust, Scala
}
data class Learner(
val id: Int,
val name: String,
val surname: String,
val language: Language
)

It’s often helpful to add utility functions for manufacturing test data,
especially when you must create many objects with the same default values
during testing. Here, makeLearner() creates objects with default values:
// Tests/unittesting/LearnerTest.kt
package unittesting
import unittesting.Language.*
import kotlin.test.*
fun makeLearner(
id: Int,
language: Language = Kotlin,
// [1]
name: String = "Test Name $id",
surname: String = "Test Surname $id"
) = Learner(id, name, surname, language)
class LearnerTest {
@Test
fun `single Learner`() {
val learner = makeLearner(10, Java)
assertEquals("Test Name 10", learner.name)
}
@Test
fun `multiple Learners`() {
val learners = (1..9).map(::makeLearner)
assertTrue(
learners.all { it.language == Kotlin })

}

}

Adding default arguments to Learner that are only for testing introduces
unnecessary complexity and potential confusion. makeLearner() is easier
and cleaner when producing test instances, and it eliminates redundant
code.
The order of makeLearner()’s parameters simplifies its usage. In this case,
we expect to specify a non-default lang more often than changing default
test values for name and surname, so the lang parameter is second ([1]).

Mocking and Integration Tests
A system that depends on other components complicates the creation of
isolated tests. Rather than introducing dependencies on real components,
programmers often use a practice called mocking.
A mock replaces a real entity with a fake one during testing. Databases are
commonly mocked to preserve the integrity of the stored data. The mock
can implement the same interface as the real one, or it can be created using
mocking libraries such as MockK.
It’s vital to test separate pieces of functionality independently—that’s what
unit tests do. It’s also essential to ensure that different parts of the system
work when combined with each other—that’s what integration tests do.
Unit tests are “inward-directed” while integration tests are “outwarddirected”.

Testing Inside IntelliJ IDEA
IntelliJ IDEA and Android Studio support creating and running unit tests.
To create a test, right-click (control-click on a Mac) the class or function
you want to test and select “Generate…” from the pop-up menu. From the
“Generate” menu, choose “Test…”. A second approach is to open the list of
“intention actions”, and select “Create Test”.

Select JUnit5 as the “Testing library”. If a message appears saying “JUnit5
library not found in the module,” push the “Fix” button next to the message.
The “Destination package” should be unittesting. The result will end up
in another directory (always separate tests from main code). The Gradle
default is the src/test/kotlin folder, but you can choose a different
destination.
Check the boxes next to the functions you want tested. You can
automatically navigate from the source code to the corresponding test class
and back; for details see the documentation.
Once the test framework code is generated, you can modify it to suit your
needs. For the examples and exercises in this atom, replace:
import org.junit.Test
import org.junit.Assert.*

with:
import kotlin.test.*

When running tests within IntelliJ IDEA, you may get an error message like
“test events were not received.” This is because IDEA’s default
configuration assumes you are running your tests externally, using Gradle.
To fix it so you can run your tests inside IDEA, start at the file menu:
File | Settings | Build, Execution, Deployment | Build Tools | Gradle

On that page you’ll see a drop-down titled “Run tests using:” which is set to
“Gradle (Default)”. Change this to “IntelliJ IDEA” and your tests will run
correctly.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

SECTION VII: POWER TOOLS
Any fool can write code that a computer can understand. Good
programmers write code that humans can understand.—Martin
Fowler

Extension Lambdas
An extension lambda is like an extension function. It defines a lambda
instead of a function.
Here, va and vb yield the same result:
// ExtensionLambdas/Vanbo.kt
package extensionlambdas
import atomictest.eq
val va: (String, Int) -> String = { str, n ->
str.repeat(n) + str.repeat(n)
}
val vb: String.(Int) -> String = {
this.repeat(it) + repeat(it)
}
fun main() {
va("Vanbo", 2) eq "VanboVanboVanboVanbo"
"Vanbo".vb(2) eq "VanboVanboVanboVanbo"
vb("Vanbo", 2) eq "VanboVanboVanboVanbo"
// "Vanbo".va(2) // Doesn't compile
}

va is an ordinary lambda like the ones you’ve seen throughout this book. It
takes two parameters, a String and an Int, and returns a String. The
lambda body also has two parameters, followed by the requisite arrow: str,
n ->.
vb moves the String parameter outside the parentheses and uses extension
function syntax: String.(Int). Just like an extension function, the object
of the type being extended (String, in this case), becomes the receiver, and
can be accessed using this.

The first call in vb uses the explicit form this.repeat(it). The second call
omits the this to produce repeat(it). Like any lambda, if you have only
one parameter (Int, in this case), it refers to that parameter.

In main(), the call to va() is just what you’d expect from the lambda type
declaration (String, Int) -> String—two arguments in a traditional
function call. vb() is an extension so it can be called using the extension
form "Vanbo".vb(2). vb() can also be called using the traditional form
vb("Vanbo", 2). va() cannot be called using the extension form.
When you first see an extension lambda, it can seem like the String.(Int)
part is what you should focus on. But String is not being extended by the
parameter list (Int)—it is being extended by the entire lambda: String.(Int)
-> String
The Kotlin documentation usually refers to extension lambdas as function
literals with receiver. The term function literal encompasses both lambdas
and anonymous functions. The term lambda with receiver is often used
synonymously for extension lambda, to emphasize that it’s a lambda with
the receiver as an additional implicit parameter.
Like an extension function, an extension lambda can have multiple
parameters:
// ExtensionLambdas/Parameters.kt
package extensionlambdas
import atomictest.eq
val zero: Int.() -> Boolean = {
this == 0
}
val one: Int.(Int) -> Boolean = {
this % it == 0
}
val two: Int.(Int, Int) -> Boolean = {
arg1, arg2 ->
this % (arg1 + arg2) == 0
}
val three: Int.(Int, Int, Int) -> Boolean = {
arg1, arg2, arg3 ->
this % (arg1 + arg2 + arg3) == 0
}
fun main() {
0.zero() eq true
10.one(10) eq true
20.two(10, 10) eq true
30.three(10, 10, 10) eq true
}

In one(), it is used instead of naming the parameter. If this produces
unclear syntax, it’s better to use explicit parameter names.
We’ve been demonstrating extension lambdas by defining vals, but they
more commonly appear as function parameters, as in f2():
// ExtensionLambdas/FunctionParameters.kt
package extensionlambdas
class A {
fun af() = 1
}
class B {
fun bf() = 2
}
fun f1(lambda: (A, B) -> Int) =
lambda(A(), B())
fun f2(lambda: A.(B) -> Int) =
A().lambda(B())
fun lambdas() {
f1 { aa, bb -> aa.af() + bb.bf() }
f2 { af() + it.bf() }
}

In main(), notice the more succinct syntax in the lambda provided to f2().
If your extension lambda returns Unit, the result produced by the lambda
body is ignored:
// ExtensionLambdas/LambdaUnitReturn.kt
package extensionlambdas
fun unitReturn(lambda: A.() -> Unit) =
A().lambda()
fun nonUnitReturn(lambda: A.() -> String) =
A().lambda()
fun lambdaUnitReturn () {
unitReturn {
"Unit ignores the return value" +
"So it can be anything ..."
}
unitReturn { 1 } // ... of any type ...
unitReturn { }
// ... or nothing
nonUnitReturn {
"Must return the proper type"
}
// nonUnitReturn { } // Not an option
}

You can pass an extension lambda to a function that expects an ordinary
lambda, as long as the parameter lists conform to each other:
// ExtensionLambdas/Transform.kt
package extensionlambdas
import atomictest.eq
fun String.transform1(
n: Int, lambda: (String, Int) -> String
) = lambda(this, n)
fun String.transform2(
n: Int, lambda: String.(Int) -> String
) = lambda(this, n)
val duplicate: String.(Int) -> String = {
repeat(it)
}
val alternate: String.(Int) -> String = {
toCharArray()
.filterIndexed { i, _ -> i % it == 0 }
.joinToString("")
}
fun main() {
"hello".transform1(5, duplicate)
.transform2(3, alternate) eq "hleolhleo"
"hello".transform2(5, duplicate)
.transform1(3, alternate) eq "hleolhleo"
}

transform1() expects an ordinary lambda while transform2() expects an
extension lambda. In main(), the extension lambdas duplicate and
alternate are passed to both transform1() and transform2(). The this
receiver inside the extension lambdas duplicate and alternate becomes
the first String argument when either lambda is passed to transform1().

Using :: we can pass a function reference when an extension lambda is
expected:
// ExtensionLambdas/FuncReferences.kt
package extensionlambdas
import atomictest.eq
fun Int.d1(f: (Int) -> Int) = f(this) * 10
fun Int.d2(f: Int.() -> Int) = f() * 10
fun f1(n: Int) = n + 3
fun Int.f2() = this + 3
fun main() {
74.d1(::f1) eq 770

}

74.d2(::f1) eq 770
74.d1(Int::f2) eq 770
74.d2(Int::f2) eq 770

A reference to an extension function has the same type as an extension
lambda: Int::f2 has the type Int.() -> Int.
In the call 74.d1(Int::f2) we pass an extension function to d1() which
does not declare an extension lambda parameter.
Polymorphism works with both ordinary extension functions (Base.g())
and extension lambdas (the Base.h() parameter):
// ExtensionLambdas/ExtensionPolymorphism.kt
package extensionlambdas
import atomictest.eq
open class Base {
open fun f() = 1
}
class Derived : Base() {
override fun f() = 99
}
fun Base.g() = f()
fun Base.h(xl: Base.() -> Int) = xl()
fun main() {
val b: Base = Derived() // Upcast
b.g() eq 99
b.h { f() } eq 99
}

You wouldn’t expect it not to work, but it’s always worth testing an
assumption by creating an example.
You can use anonymous function syntax (described in Local Functions)
instead of extension lambdas. Here we use an anonymous extension
function:
// ExtensionLambdas/AnonymousFunction.kt
package extensionlambdas
import atomictest.eq
fun exec(
arg1: Int, arg2: Int,
f: Int.(Int) -> Boolean
) = arg1.f(arg2)

fun main() {
exec(10, 2, fun Int.(d: Int): Boolean {
return this % d == 0
}) eq true
}

In main(), the call to exec() shows that the anonymous extension function
is accepted as an extension lambda.
The Kotlin standard library contains a number of functions that work with
extension lambdas. For example, a StringBuilder is a modifiable object
that produces an immutable String when you call toString(). In contrast,
the more modern buildString() accepts an extension lambda. It creates its
own StringBuilder object, applies the extension lambda to that object,
then calls toString() to produce the result:
// ExtensionLambdas/StringCreation.kt
package extensionlambdas
import atomictest.eq
private fun messy(): String {
val built = StringBuilder()
// [1]
built.append("ABCs: ")
('a'..'x').forEach { built.append(it) }
return built.toString()
// [2]
}
private fun clean() = buildString {
append("ABCs: ")
('a'..'x').forEach { append(it) }
}
private fun cleaner() =
('a'..'x').joinToString("", "ABCs: ")
fun main() {
messy() eq "ABCs: abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwx"
messy() eq clean()
clean() eq cleaner()
}

In messy() we repeat the name built multiple times. We must also create a
StringBuilder ([1]) and produce the result ([2]). Using buildString() in
clean(), you don’t need to create and manage the receiver for the append()
calls, which makes everything much more succinct.
cleaner() shows that, if you look, you can sometimes find a more direct

solution that skips the builder altogether.

There are standard library functions similar to buildString() that use
extension lambdas to produce initialized, read-only Lists and Maps:
// ExtensionLambdas/ListsAndMaps.kt
@file:OptIn(ExperimentalStdlibApi::class)
package extensionlambdas
import atomictest.eq
val characters: List<String> = buildList {
add("Chars:")
('a'..'d').forEach { add("$it") }
}
val charmap: Map<Char, Int> = buildMap {
('A'..'F').forEachIndexed { n, ch ->
put(ch, n)
}
}
fun main() {
characters eq "[Chars:, a, b, c, d]"
// characters eq characters2
charmap eq "{A=0, B=1, C=2, D=3, E=4, F=5}"
}

Inside the extension lambdas, the List and Map are mutable, but the results
of buildList and buildMap are read-only Lists and Maps.

Writing Builders Using Extension Lambdas
Hypothetically, you can create constructors to produce all necessary object
configurations. Sometimes the number of possibilities makes this messy
and impractical. The Builder pattern has several benefits:
1. It creates objects in a multi-step process. This can sometimes be
helpful when object construction is complex.
2. It produces different object variations using the same basic
construction code.
3. It separates common construction code from specialized code, making
it easier to write and read the code for individual object variations.
Implementing builders using extension lambdas provides an additional
benefit, which is the creation of a Domain-Specific Language (DSL). The
goal of a DSL is syntax that is comfortable and sensible to a user who is a
domain expert rather than a programming expert. This allows that user to
produce working solutions knowing only a small subset of the surrounding

language—while at the same time benefiting from the structure and safety
of that language.
For example, consider a system that captures actions and ingredients for
preparing different kinds of sandwiches. We can use classes to model the
pieces of a Recipe:
// ExtensionLambdas/Sandwich.kt
package sandwich
import atomictest.eq
open class Recipe : ArrayList<RecipeUnit>()
open class RecipeUnit {
override fun toString() =
"${this::class.simpleName}"
}
open class Operation : RecipeUnit()
class Toast : Operation()
class Grill : Operation()
class Cut : Operation()
open class Ingredient : RecipeUnit()
class Bread : Ingredient()
class PeanutButter : Ingredient()
class GrapeJelly : Ingredient()
class Ham : Ingredient()
class Swiss : Ingredient()
class Mustard : Ingredient()
open class Sandwich : Recipe() {
fun action(op: Operation): Sandwich {
add(op)
return this
}
fun grill() = action(Grill())
fun toast() = action(Toast())
fun cut() = action(Cut())
}
fun sandwich(
fillings: Sandwich.() -> Unit
): Sandwich {
val sandwich = Sandwich()
sandwich.add(Bread())
sandwich.toast()
sandwich.fillings()
sandwich.cut()
return sandwich
}
fun main() {
val pbj = sandwich {
add(PeanutButter())
add(GrapeJelly())
}

}

val hamAndSwiss = sandwich {
add(Ham())
add(Swiss())
add(Mustard())
grill()
}
pbj eq "[Bread, Toast, PeanutButter, " +
"GrapeJelly, Cut]"
hamAndSwiss eq "[Bread, Toast, Ham, " +
"Swiss, Mustard, Grill, Cut]"

sandwich() captures the basic ingredients and operations to produce any
Sandwich (here, we assume all sandwiches are toasted, but in the exercises
you’ll see how to make that optional). The fillings extension lambda
allows the caller to configure the Sandwich in numerous different ways, but

without requiring a constructor for each configuration.

The syntax seen in main() shows how this system might be used as a DSL
—the user only needs to understand the syntax of creating a Sandwich by
calling sandwich() and providing the ingredients and operations inside the
curly braces.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Scope Functions
Scope functions create a temporary scope wherein you can access an
object without using its name.
Scope functions exist only to make your code more concise and readable.
They do not provide additional abilities.
There are five scope functions: let(), run(), with(), apply(), and also().
They are designed to work with a lambda and do not require an import.
They differ in the way you access the context object, using either it or
this, and in what they return. with() uses a different calling syntax than
the others. Here you can see the differences:
// ScopeFunctions/Differences.kt
package scopefunctions
import atomictest.eq
data class Tag(var n: Int = 0) {
var s: String = ""
fun increment() = ++n
}
fun main() {
// let(): Access object with 'it'
// Returns last expression in lambda
Tag(1).let {
it.s = "let: ${it.n}"
it.increment()
} eq 2
// let() with named lambda argument:
Tag(2).let { tag ->
tag.s = "let: ${tag.n}"
tag.increment()
} eq 3
// run(): Access object with 'this'
// Returns last expression in lambda
Tag(3).run {
s = "run: $n" // Implicit 'this'
increment()
// Implicit 'this'
} eq 4
// with(): Access object with 'this'
// Returns last expression in lambda
with(Tag(4)) {

s = "with: $n"
increment()
} eq 5
// apply(): Access object with 'this'
// Returns modified object
Tag(5).apply {
s = "apply: $n"
increment()
} eq "Tag(n=6)"
// also(): Access object with 'it'
// Returns modified object
Tag(6).also {
it.s = "also: ${it.n}"
it.increment()
} eq "Tag(n=7)"

}

// also() with named lambda argument:
Tag(7).also { tag ->
tag.s = "also: ${tag.n}"
tag.increment()
} eq "Tag(n=8)"

There are multiple scope functions because they satisfy different
combinations of needs:
Scope functions that access the context object using this (run(),
with() and apply()) produce the cleanest syntax within their scope
block.
Scope functions that access the context object using it (let() and
also()) allow you to provide a named lambda argument.
Scope functions that produce the last expression in their lambda
(let(), run() and with()) are for creating results.
Scope functions that return the modified context object (apply() and
also()) are for chaining expressions together.
run() is a regular function and with() is an extension function; otherwise
they are identical. Prefer run() for call chains and when the receiver is

nullable.

Here’s a summary of scope function characteristics:
Produces last expression
Produces receiver

this Context

it Context

with, run

let

apply

also

You can apply a scope function to a nullable receiver using the safe access
operator ?., which only calls the scope function if the receiver is not null:
// ScopeFunctions/AndNullability.kt
package scopefunctions
import atomictest.eq
import kotlin.random.Random
fun gets(): String? =
if (Random.nextBoolean()) "str!" else null
fun main() {
gets()?.let {
it.removeSuffix("!") + it.length
}?.eq("str4")
}

In main(), if gets() produces a non-null result then let is invoked. The
non-nullable receiver of let becomes the non-nullable it inside the
lambda.
Applying the safe access operator to the context object null-checks the
entire scope, as seen in [1]-[4] in the following. Otherwise, each call within
the scope must be individually null-checked:
// ScopeFunctions/Gnome.kt
package scopefunctions
class Gnome(val name: String) {
fun who() = "Gnome: $name"
}
fun whatGnome(gnome: Gnome?) {
gnome?.let { it.who() }
// [1]
gnome.let { it?.who() }
gnome?.run { who() }
// [2]
gnome.run { this?.who() }
gnome?.apply { who() }
// [3]
gnome.apply { this?.who() }
gnome?.also { it.who() }
// [4]
gnome.also { it?.who() }
// No help for nullability:
with(gnome) { this?.who() }
}

When you use the safe access operator on let(), run(), apply() or
also(), the entire scope is ignored for a null context object:
// ScopeFunctions/NullGnome.kt
package scopefunctions
import atomictest.*

fun whichGnome(gnome: Gnome?) {
trace(gnome?.name)
gnome?.let { trace(it.who()) }
gnome?.run { trace(who()) }
gnome?.apply { trace(who()) }
gnome?.also { trace(it.who()) }
}
fun main() {
whichGnome(Gnome("Bob"))
whichGnome(null)
trace eq """
Bob
Gnome: Bob
Gnome: Bob
Gnome: Bob
Gnome: Bob
null
"""
}

The trace shows that when whichGnome() receives a null argument, no
scope functions execute.
Attempting to retrieve an object from a Map has a nullable result because
there’s no guarantee it will find an entry for that key. Here we show the
different scope functions applied to the result of a Map lookup:
// ScopeFunctions/MapLookup.kt
package scopefunctions
import atomictest.*
data class Plumbus(var id: Int)
fun display(map: Map<String, Plumbus>) {
trace("displaying $map")
val pb1: Plumbus = map["main"]?.let {
it.id += 10
it
} ?: return
trace(pb1)
val pb2: Plumbus? = map["main"]?.run {
id += 9
this
}
trace(pb2)
val pb3: Plumbus? = map["main"]?.apply {
id += 8
}
trace(pb3)
val pb4: Plumbus? = map["main"]?.also {
it.id += 7
}
trace(pb4)

}
fun main() {
display(mapOf("main" to Plumbus(1)))
display(mapOf("none" to Plumbus(2)))
trace eq """
displaying {main=Plumbus(id=1)}
Plumbus(id=11)
Plumbus(id=20)
Plumbus(id=28)
Plumbus(id=35)
displaying {none=Plumbus(id=2)}
"""
}

Although with() can be forced into this example, the results are too ugly to
consider.
In the trace you see that each Plumbus object is created during the first call
to display() in main(), but none are created during the second call. Look
at the definition of pb1 and recall the Elvis operator. If the expression to the
left of ?: is not null, it becomes the result and is assigned to pb1. But if
that expression is null, the right side of ?: becomes the result, which is
return so display() returns before completing the initialization of pb1,
and thus none of the values pb1-pb4 are created.
Scope functions work with nullable types in chained calls:
// ScopeFunctions/NameTag.kt
package scopefunctions
import atomictest.trace
val functions = listOf(
fun(name: String?) {
name
?.takeUnless { it.isBlank() }
?.let { trace("$it in let") }
},
fun(name: String?) {
name
?.takeUnless { it.isBlank() }
?.run { trace("$this in run") }
},
fun(name: String?) {
name
?.takeUnless { it.isBlank() }
?.apply { trace("$this in apply") }
},
fun(name: String?) {
name
?.takeUnless { it.isBlank() }
?.also { trace("$it in also") }
},

)
fun main() {
functions.forEach { it(null) }
functions.forEach { it(" ") }
functions.forEach { it("Yumyulack") }
trace eq """
Yumyulack in let
Yumyulack in run
Yumyulack in apply
Yumyulack in also
"""
}

functions is a List of function references that are applied by the forEach
calls in main(), using it together with function-call syntax. Each function
in functions uses a different scope function. The forEach calls to
it(null) and it(" ") are effectively ignored, so we only display nonnull, non-blank input.

When nesting scope functions, multiple this or it objects can be available
in a given context. Sometimes it’s difficult to know which object is
selected:
// ScopeFunctions/Nesting.kt
package scopefunctions
import atomictest.eq
fun nesting(s: String, i: Int): String =
with(s) {
with(i) {
toString()
}
} +
s.let {
i.let {
it.toString()
}
} +
s.run {
i.run {
toString()
}
} +
s.apply {
i.apply {
toString()
}
} +
s.also {
i.also {
it.toString()
}
}

fun main() {
nesting("X", 7) eq "777XX"
}

In all cases, the call to toString() is applied to Int because the “closest”
this or it is the Int implicit receiver. apply() and also() return the
modified object s instead of the result of the calculation. As scope functions
are intended to improve readability, nesting scope functions is a
questionable practice.
None of the scope functions provide resource cleanup the way that use()
does:
// ScopeFunctions/Blob.kt
package scopefunctions
import atomictest.*
data class Blob(val id: Int) : AutoCloseable {
override fun toString() = "Blob($id)"
fun show() { trace("$this")}
override fun close() = trace("Close $this")
}
fun main() {
Blob(1).let { it.show() }
Blob(2).run { show() }
with(Blob(3)) { show() }
Blob(4).apply { show() }
Blob(5).also { it.show() }
Blob(6).use { it.show() }
Blob(7).use { it.run { show() } }
Blob(8).apply { show() }.also { it.close() }
Blob(9).also { it.show() }.apply { close() }
Blob(10).apply { show() }.use { }
trace eq """
Blob(1)
Blob(2)
Blob(3)
Blob(4)
Blob(5)
Blob(6)
Close Blob(6)
Blob(7)
Close Blob(7)
Blob(8)
Close Blob(8)
Blob(9)
Close Blob(9)
Blob(10)
Close Blob(10)
"""
}

Although use() looks similar to let() and also(), use() does not allow
anything to be returned from its lambda. This prevents expression chaining
or producing results.
Without use(), close() is not called for any of the scope functions. To use
a scope function and guarantee cleanup, place the scope function inside the
use() lambda as in Blob(7). Blob(8) and Blob(9) show how to explicitly
call close(), and how to use apply() and also() interchangeably.
Blob(10) uses apply() and the result is passed into use(), which calls
close() at the end of its lambda.

Scope Functions are Inlined
Normally, passing a lambda as an argument stores the lambda code in an
auxiliary object, adding a small bit of runtime overhead compared to a
regular function call. This overhead is usually not a concern, considering
the benefits of lambdas (readability and code structure). In addition, the
JVM contains numerous optimizations that often compensate for the
overhead.
Any performance cost, no matter how small, produces recommendations to
“use a feature with care.” All runtime overhead is eliminated by defining
the scope functions as inline. This way, scope functions can be used
without hesitation.
When the compiler sees an inline function call, it substitutes the function
body for the function call, replacing all parameters with actual arguments.
Inlining works well for small functions, where function-call overhead can
be a significant portion of the entire call. As functions get larger, the cost of
the call shrinks in comparison to the time required by the entire call,
diminishing the value of inlining. At the same time, the resulting bytecode
increases because the entire function body is inserted at each call site.
When an inlined function takes a lambda argument, the compiler inlines the
lambda body together with the function body. Thus, no additional classes or

objects are created to pass the lambda to the function. (This only works
when the lambda is called directly, or passed to another inline function).
Although you can apply it to any function, inline is intended for either
inlining lambda bodies or creating reified generics. You can find more
information about inline functions here.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Creating Generics
Generic code works with types that are “specified later.”
Ordinary classes and functions work with specific types. If you want code
to work across more types, this rigidity can be overconstraining.
Polymorphism is an object-oriented generalization tool. You write a
function that takes a base-class object as a parameter, then call that function
with an object of any class derived from that base class—including classes
that haven’t yet been created. Now your function is more general, and
useful in more places.
A single hierarchy can be too limiting because you must inherit from that
hierarchy to produce an object that fits your function parameter. If a
function parameter is an interface instead of a class, the limitations are
loosened to include anything that implements that interface. This gives the
client programmer the option of implementing an interface in combination
with an existing class—that is, to adapt an existing class to fit the function.
Used this way, interfaces can cut across class hierarchies.
Sometimes even an interface is too restrictive because it forces you to work
with only that interface. Your code can be even more general if it works
with “some unspecified type,” rather than a particular interface or class.
That “unspecified type” is a generic type parameter.
Creating generic types and functions is a fairly complex topic, much of
which is outside the scope of this book. This atom attempts to give you just
enough background so you aren’t surprised when you come across generic
concepts and keywords. If you want to get serious about writing generic
types and functions you’ll need to study more advanced resources.
Any

Any is the root of the Kotlin class hierarchy. Every Kotlin class has Any as a
superclass. One way to work with unspecified types is by passing Any

arguments, and this can sometimes confuse the issue of when to use
generics. If Any works, it’s the simpler solution, and simpler is generally
better.

There are two ways to use Any. The first, and most straightforward
approach, is when you only need to operate on an Any, and nothing more.
This is extremely limiting—Any has only three member functions:
equals(), hashCode() and toString(). There are also extension functions,
but these cannot perform any direct operations on the type. For example,
apply() only applies its function argument to the Any.
If you know the type of the Any, you can cast it and perform type-specific
operations. Because this involves run-time type information (as shown in
Downcasting), you risk a runtime error if you pass the wrong type to your
function (there’s also a slight performance impact). Sometimes this is
justified to gain the benefit of eliminating code duplication.
For example, suppose three types each have the ability to communicate.
They come from different libraries so you can’t just put them in the same
hierarchy, and they have different function names for communicating:
// CreatingGenerics/Speakers.kt
package creatinggenerics
import atomictest.eq
class Person {
fun speak() = "Hi!"
}
class Dog {
fun bark() = "Ruff!"
}
class Robot {
fun communicate() = "Beep!"
}
fun talk(speaker: Any) = when (speaker) {
is Person -> speaker.speak()
is Dog -> speaker.bark()
is Robot -> speaker.communicate()
else -> "Not a talker" // Or exception
}
fun main() {

}

talk(Person()) eq "Hi!"
talk(Dog()) eq "Ruff!"
talk(Robot()) eq "Beep!"
talk(11) eq "Not a talker"

The when expression discovers the type of the speaker and calls the
appropriate function. If you don’t think talk() will ever need to work with
additional types, this is a tolerable solution. Otherwise, it requires you to
modify talk() for each new type you add, and to rely on runtime
information to discover when you miss something.

Defining Generics
Duplicated code is a candidate for conversion into a generic function or
type. You do this by adding angle brackets (<>) containing one or more
generic placeholders. Here, the generic placeholder T represents the
unknown type:
// CreatingGenerics/DefiningGenerics.kt
package creatinggenerics
fun <T> gFunction(arg: T): T = arg
class GClass<T>(val x: T) {
fun f(): T = x
}
class GMemberFunction {
fun <T> f(arg: T): T = arg
}
interface GInterface<T> {
val x: T
fun f(): T
}
class GImplementation<T>(
override val x: T
) : GInterface<T> {
override fun f(): T = x
}
class ConcreteImplementation
: GInterface<String> {
override val x: String
get() = "x"
override fun f() = "f()"
}
fun basicGenerics() {
gFunction("Yellow")
gFunction(1)

gFunction(Dog()).bark()
gFunction<Dog>(Dog()).bark()
GClass("Cyan").f()
GClass(11).f()
GClass(Dog()).f().bark()
GClass<Dog>(Dog()).f().bark()

// [1]

// [2]

GMemberFunction().f("Amber")
GMemberFunction().f(111)
GMemberFunction().f(Dog()).bark() // [3]
GMemberFunction().f<Dog>(Dog()).bark()
GImplementation("Cyan").f()
GImplementation(11).f()
GImplementation(Dog()).f().bark()

}

ConcreteImplementation().f()
ConcreteImplementation().x

basicGenerics() shows that each generic handles different types:
gFunction() takes a parameter of type T and returns a T result.
GClass stores a T. Its member function f() returns a T.
GMemberFunction parameterizes a member function within the class,

rather than parameterizing the entire class.
You can also define an interface with generic parameters as shown in
GInterface. An implementation of GInterface can either redefine a
type parameter as in GImplementation, or provide a specific type
argument, as in ConcreteImplementation.
Notice in [1], [2] and [3] that we are able to call bark() on the result,
because that result emerges as type Dog.
Consider [1], [2] and [3], and the lines immediately following them. The
type T is determined by type inference for [1], [2] and [3]. Sometimes this is
not possible if a generic or its invocation is too complex to be parsed by the
compiler. In this case you must specify the type(s) using the syntax shown
in the lines immediately following [1], [2] and [3].

Preserving Type Information
As you will see later in this atom, code within generic classes and functions
can’t know the type of T—this is called erasure. Generics can be thought of
as a way to preserve type information for the return value. This way, you

don’t have to write code to explicitly check and cast a return value to the
desired type.
A common use of generic code is for containers that hold other objects.
Consider a CarCrate class that acts as a trivial collection by holding and
producing a single element of type Car:
// CreatingGenerics/CarCrate.kt
package creatinggenerics
import atomictest.eq
class Car {
override fun toString() = "Car"
}
class CarCrate(private var c: Car) {
fun put(car: Car) { c = car }
fun get(): Car = c
}
fun main() {
val cc = CarCrate(Car())
val car: Car = cc.get()
car eq "Car"
}

When we call cc.get(), the result comes back as type Car. We’d like to
make this tool available to more objects than just Cars, so we generify this
class as Crate<T>:
// CreatingGenerics/Crate.kt
package creatinggenerics
import atomictest.eq
open class Crate<T>(private var contents: T) {
fun put(item: T) { contents = item }
fun get(): T = contents
}
fun main() {
val cc = Crate(Car())
val car: Car = cc.get()
car eq "Car"
}

Crate<T> ensures that you can only put() a T into the Crate, and when you
call get() on that Crate, the result comes back as type T.

We can make a version of map() for Crate by defining a generic extension
function:

// CreatingGenerics/MapCrate.kt
package creatinggenerics
import atomictest.eq
fun <T, R> Crate<T>.map(f:(T) -> R): List<R> =
listOf(f(get()))
fun main() {
Crate(Car()).map { it.toString() + "x" } eq
"[Carx]"
}

map() returns the List of results produced by applying f() to each element
in the input sequence. Because Crate only contains a single element, the
result is always a List of one element. There are two generic arguments: T
for the input value and R for the result, allowing f() to produce a result type

that is different from the input type.

Type Parameter Constraints
A type parameter constraint says that the generic argument type must be
inherited from the constraint. <T : Base> means that T must be of type
Base or something derived from Base. This section shows that using
constraints is different from a non-generic type that inherits Base.
Consider a type hierarchy that models different items and ways to dispose
of them:
// CreatingGenerics/Disposable.kt
package creatinggenerics
import atomictest.eq
interface Disposable {
val name: String
fun action(): String
}
class Compost(override val name: String) :
Disposable {
override fun action() = "Add to composter"
}
interface Transport : Disposable
class Donation(override val name: String) :
Transport {
override fun action() = "Call for pickup"
}
class Recyclable(override val name: String) :
Transport {

}

override fun action() = "Put in bin"

class Landfill(override val name: String) :
Transport {
override fun action() = "Put in dumpster"
}
val items = listOf(
Compost("Orange Peel"),
Compost("Apple Core"),
Donation("Couch"),
Donation("Clothing"),
Recyclable("Plastic"),
Recyclable("Metal"),
Recyclable("Cardboard"),
Landfill("Trash"),
)
val recyclables =
items.filterIsInstance<Recyclable>()

Using a constraint, we can access properties and functions of the
constrained type within a generic function:
// CreatingGenerics/Constrained.kt
package creatinggenerics
import atomictest.eq
fun <T: Disposable> nameOf(disposable: T) =
disposable.name
// As an extension:
fun <T: Disposable> T.name() = name
fun main() {
recyclables.map { nameOf(it) } eq
"[Plastic, Metal, Cardboard]"
recyclables.map { it.name() } eq
"[Plastic, Metal, Cardboard]"
}

We cannot access name without the constraint.
This achieves the same result without generics:
// CreatingGenerics/NonGenericConstraint.kt
package creatinggenerics
import atomictest.eq
fun nameOf2(disposable: Disposable) =
disposable.name
fun Disposable.name2() = name
fun main() {

}

recyclables.map { nameOf2(it) } eq
"[Plastic, Metal, Cardboard]"
recyclables.map { it.name2() } eq
"[Plastic, Metal, Cardboard]"

Why use a constraint instead of ordinary polymorphism? The answer is in
the return type. With generics, the return type can be exact, rather than
being upcast to the base type:
// CreatingGenerics/SameReturnType.kt
package creatinggenerics
import kotlin.random.Random
private val rnd = Random(47)
fun List<Disposable>.aRandom(): Disposable =
this[rnd.nextInt(size)]
fun <T: Disposable> List<T>.bRandom(): T =
this[rnd.nextInt(size)]
fun <T> List<T>.cRandom(): T =
this[rnd.nextInt(size)]
fun sameReturnType() {
val a: Disposable = recyclables.aRandom()
val b: Recyclable = recyclables.bRandom()
val c: Recyclable = recyclables.cRandom()
}

Without generics, aRandom() can only produce a base-class Disposable,
while both bRandom() and cRandom() produce a Recyclable. bRandom()
never accesses any elements of T, therefore its constraint is pointless and it
ends up being the same as cRandom(), which doesn’t use a constraint.
The only time you need constraints is if you require both of the following:
1. Access a function or property.
2. Preserve the type when returning it.
// CreatingGenerics/Constraints.kt
package creatinggenerics
import kotlin.random.Random
private val rnd = Random(47)
// Accesses action() but can't
// return the exact type:
fun List<Disposable>.inexact(): Disposable {
val d: Disposable = this[rnd.nextInt(size)]
d.action()

}

return d

// Can't access action() without a constraint:
fun <T> List<T>.noAccess(): T {
val d: T = this[rnd.nextInt(size)]
// d.action()
return d
}
// Access action() and return the exact type:
fun <T: Disposable> List<T>.both(): T {
val d: T = this[rnd.nextInt(size)]
d.action()
return d
}
fun constraints() {
val i: Disposable = recyclables.inexact()
val n: Recyclable = recyclables.noAccess()
val b: Recyclable = recyclables.both()
}

inexact() is an extension to List<Disposable>, which allows it to access
action(), but it is not generic so it can only return the base type
Disposable. As a generic, noAccess() is able to return the exact type of T,
but without a constraint it cannot access action(). Only when you add the
constraint on T in both() are you able to access action() and return the
exact type T.

Type Erasure
Java compatibility is an essential part of Kotlin. In Java, generics were not
part of the original language—they were added years later, after large
bodies of code had been written. Forcing generics into Java without
breaking existing code required a crucial compromise: the generic types are
only available during compilation but are not preserved at runtime—the
types are erased. This erasure affects Kotlin.
Let’s pretend erasure doesn’t happen:
// CreatingGenerics/Erasure.kt
package creatinggenerics
fun main() {
val strings = listOf("a", "b", "c")
val all: List<Any> = listOf(1, 2, "x")
useList(strings)
useList(all)
}

fun useList(list: List<Any>) {
// if (list is List<String>) {}
}

// [1]

Uncomment line [1] and you’ll see the following error: “Cannot check for
instance of erased type: List<String>”. You can’t test for the generic type at
runtime because the type information has been erased.
If erasure didn’t happen, the list might look like this, assuming additional
type information is placed at the end of the list (it does not work this way!):

Reified Generics

Because generic types are erased, type information is not stored in the List.
Instead, both strings and all are just Lists, with no additional type
information:

Erased Generics

You cannot guess type information from the List contents without
analyzing all elements. Checking only the first element from the second list
leads you to incorrectly assume that it’s a List<Int>.
The Kotlin designers decided to follow Java and use erasure, for two
reasons:

1. Java compatibility.
2. Overhead. Storing generic type information significantly increases the
memory occupied by a generic List or Map. For example, a standard
Map consists of many Map.Entry objects, and Map.Entry is a generic
class. Thus, if generics were reified everywhere by default, each key
and value of every Map.Entry would contain additional type
information.

Reification of Function Type Arguments
Type information is also erased for generic function calls, which means you
can’t do much with a generic parameter inside a function.
To retain type information for function arguments, add the reified
keyword. Consider a function a() that requires class information to perform
its task:
// CreatingGenerics/ReificationA.kt
package creatinggenerics
import kotlin.reflect.KClass
fun <T: Any> a(kClass: KClass<T>) {
// Uses KClass<T>
}

When we call a() inside a second generic function b(), we would like to
use type information for the generic argument:
// CreatingGenerics/ReificationB.kt
package creatinggenerics
// Doesn't compile because of erasure:
// fun <T: Any> b() = a(T::class)

The type information for T is erased when this code runs, so b() won’t
compile. You can’t access the class of the generic type parameter inside the
function body.
The Java solution is to pass type information into the function by hand:
// CreatingGenerics/ReificationC.kt
package creatinggenerics
import kotlin.reflect.KClass
fun <T: Any> c(kClass: KClass<T>) = a(kClass)

class K
val kc = c(K::class)

Passing explicit type information should be redundant because the compiler
knows the type of T, and could silently pass it for you. This is effectively
what the reified keyword does.
To use reified, the function must also be inline:
// CreatingGenerics/ReificationD.kt
package creatinggenerics
inline fun <reified T: Any> d() = a(T::class)
val kd = d<K>()

d() produces the same effect as c(), but d() doesn’t require the class

reference as an argument.

reified tells the compiler to preserve the information about the

corresponding type argument. The type information is now available at
runtime so you can access it inside the function body.
Reification allows the use of is with a generic parameter type:
// CreatingGenerics/CheckType.kt
package creatinggenerics
import atomictest.eq
inline fun <reified T> check(t: Any) = t is T
// fun <T> check1(t: Any) = t is T
// [1]
fun main() {
check<String>("1") eq true
check<Int>("1") eq false
}

[1] Without reified, the type information is erased so you can’t check
whether a given element is an instance of T.
In the following example, select() produces the name of each Disposable
item of a particular subtype. It uses reified combined with a constraint:
// CreatingGenerics/Select.kt
package creatinggenerics

import atomictest.eq
inline fun <reified T : Disposable> select() =
items.filterIsInstance<T>().map { it.name }
fun main() {
select<Compost>() eq
"[Orange Peel, Apple Core]"
select<Donation>() eq "[Couch, Clothing]"
select<Recyclable>() eq
"[Plastic, Metal, Cardboard]"
select<Landfill>() eq "[Trash]"
}

The library function filterIsInstance() is itself defined using the
reified keyword.

Variance
Combining generics and inheritance produces two dimensions of change. If
you have a Container<T> and you want to assign it to a Container<U>
where T and U have an inheritance relationship, you must place constraints
upon Container using the in or out variance annotations, depending on
how you want to use Container.
Here are three versions of a Box container: a basic Box<T>, one using <in
T> and one using <out T>:
// CreatingGenerics/InAndOutBoxes.kt
package variance
class Box<T>(private var contents: T) {
fun put(item: T) { contents = item }
fun get(): T = contents
}
class InBox<in T>(private var contents: T) {
fun put(item: T) { contents = item }
}
class OutBox<out T>(private var contents: T) {
fun get(): T = contents
}

in T means that member functions of the class can only accept arguments
of type T, but cannot return values of type T. That is, T objects can be placed
into an InBox, but cannot come out.

out T means that member functions can return T objects, but cannot accept
arguments of type T—you cannot place T objects into an OutBox.

Why do we need these constraints? Consider this hierarchy:
// CreatingGenerics/Pets.kt
package variance
open class Pet
class Cat : Pet()
class Dog : Pet()

Cat and Dog are both subtypes of Pet. Is there a subtyping relation between
Box<Cat> and Box<Pet>? It seems like we should be able to assign, for
example, a Box of Cat to a Box of Pet or to a Box of Any (because Any is a

supertype of everything):

// CreatingGenerics/BoxAssignment.kt
package variance
val catBox = Box<Cat>(Cat())
// val petBox: Box<Pet> = catBox
// val anyBox: Box<Any> = catBox

If Kotlin allowed this, petBox would have put(item: Pet). Dog is also a
Pet, so this would allow you to put a Dog into catBox, violating the “catness” of that Box.
Worse, anyBox would have put(item: Any), so you could put an Any into
catBox—the container would have no type safety at all.
If we prevent the use of put(), the assignments are safe because no one can
put a Dog into an OutBox<Cat>. The compiler allows us to assign an
OutBox<Cat> to an OutBox<Pet> or to an OutBox<Any>, because the out
annotation prevents them from having put() functions:
// CreatingGenerics/OutBoxAssignment.kt
package variance
val outCatBox: OutBox<Cat> = OutBox(Cat())
val outPetBox: OutBox<Pet> = outCatBox
val outAnyBox: OutBox<Any> = outCatBox
fun getting() {
val cat: Cat = outCatBox.get()
val pet: Pet = outPetBox.get()

}

val any: Any = outAnyBox.get()

With no put(), we cannot place a Dog into an OutBox<Cat>, so its “catness” is preserved.
Without a get(), an InBox<Any> can be assigned to an InBox<Pet>, an
InBox<Cat> or an InBox<Dog>:
// CreatingGenerics/InBoxAssignment.kt
package variance
val inBoxAny: InBox<Any> = InBox(Any())
val inBoxPet: InBox<Pet> = inBoxAny
val inBoxCat: InBox<Cat> = inBoxAny
val inBoxDog: InBox<Dog> = inBoxAny
fun main() {
inBoxAny.put(Any())
inBoxAny.put(Pet())
inBoxAny.put(Cat())
inBoxAny.put(Dog())
inBoxPet.put(Pet())
inBoxPet.put(Cat())
inBoxPet.put(Dog())

}

inBoxCat.put(Cat())
inBoxDog.put(Dog())

It is safe to put() an Any, Pet, Cat or Dog into an InBox<Any>, while you
can only put() a Pet, Cat or Dog into an InBox<Pet>. inBoxCat and
inBoxDog will only accept Cats and Dogs, respectively. These are the
behaviors we expect for boxes that have those type parameters, and the
compiler enforces it.
Here’s a summary of the subtyping relationships for Box, OutBox and InBox:

Variance

Box<T> is invariant. This means that neither Box<Cat> nor Box<Pet> is

a subtype of the other, so neither can be assigned to the other.
OutBox<out T> is covariant. This means that OutBox<Cat> is a
subtype of OutBox<Pet>. When you upcast an OutBox<Cat> to an
OutBox<Pet>, it varies in the same way as upcasting a Cat to a Pet.
InBox<in T> is contravariant. This means that InBox<Pet> is a
subtype of InBox<Cat>. When you upcast an InBox<Pet> to an
InBox<Cat>, it varies in the opposite way as upcasting a Cat to a Pet.
A read-only List from the Kotlin standard library is covariant. You can
assign a List<Cat> to a List<Pet>. A MutableList is invariant because it
contains an add():
// CreatingGenerics/CovariantList.kt
package variance
fun main() {
val catList: List<Cat> = listOf(Cat())
val petList: List<Pet> = catList
var mutablePetList: MutableList<Pet> =
mutableListOf(Cat())
mutablePetList.add(Dog())
// Type mismatch:
// mutablePetList =
//
mutableListOf<Cat>(Cat()) // [1]
}

[1] If this assignment worked, we could violate the “cat-ness” of the
mutableListOf<Cat> by adding a Dog.
Functions can have covariant return types. This means that an overriding
function can return a type that’s more specific than the function it overrides:
// CreatingGenerics/CovariantReturnTypes.kt
package variance
interface Parent
interface Child : Parent
interface X {
fun f(): Parent
}
interface Y : X {
override fun f(): Child
}

Notice how the overridden f() in Y returns a Child, while f() in X returns a
Parent.
This subsection has only been a light introduction to the topic of variance.
Repeated code is a candidate for generic types or functions. This atom only
provides a basic grasp of the ideas—if you need deeper understanding you
must find it in a more advanced treatment.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Operator Overloading
In the context of computer programming, overloading means “adding
extra meaning to something that already exists.”
Operator overloading allows you to take an operator like + and give it
meaning for your new type, or extra meaning for an existing type.
Operator overloading has a tumultuous past. It was popularized in C++, but
because C++ had no garbage collection, writing overloaded operators was
difficult. As a result, the early Java designers deemed operator overloading
“bad” and didn’t allow it in Java, even though Java’s garbage collection
would have made it relatively easy. The simplicity of operator overloading
when supported by garbage collection was demonstrated in the Python
language, which constrained you to a limited (familiar) set of operators, as
did C++. Scala then experimented with allowing you to invent your own
operators, causing some programmers to abuse this feature and create
incomprehensible code. Kotlin learned from these languages, and has
simplified the process of operator overloading but restricts your choices to a
reasonable and familiar set of operators. In addition, the rules of operator
precedence cannot be changed.
We’ll create a small class Num and add an overloaded + as an extension
function. To overload an operator you use the operator keyword before
fun, followed by the special predefined function name for that operator. For
example, the special function name for the + operator is plus():
// OperatorOverloading/Num.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
data class Num(val n: Int)
operator fun Num.plus(rval: Num) =
Num(n + rval.n)
fun main() {
Num(4) + Num(5) eq Num(9)

}

Num(4).plus(Num(5)) eq Num(9)

If you were defining a normal (non-operator) function for use between two
operands, you’d use the infix keyword, but operators are already infix.
Because plus() is an ordinary function, you can also call it in the
conventional way.
When you define an operator as a member function, you can access
private elements in a class that an extension function cannot:
// OperatorOverloading/MemberOperator.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
data class Num2(private val n: Int) {
operator fun plus(rval: Num2) =
Num2(n + rval.n)
}
// Cannot access 'n': it is private in 'Num2':
// operator fun Num2.minus(rval: Num2) =
//
Num2(n - rval.n)
fun main() {
Num2(4) + Num2(5) eq Num2(9)
}

In some contexts it’s helpful to create special meaning for an operator.
Here, we model a Molecule with a + that attaches it to another Molecule.
The attached property is the link between Molecules:
// OperatorOverloading/Molecule.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
data class Molecule(
val id: Int = idCount++,
var attached: Molecule? = null
) {
companion object {
private var idCount = 0
}
operator fun plus(other: Molecule) {
attached = other
}
}
fun main() {
val m1 = Molecule()
val m2 = Molecule()
m1 + m2
// [1]
m1 eq "Molecule(id=0, attached=" +

}

"Molecule(id=1, attached=null))"

[1] Reads like a familiar math expression, but to the person using the
model it might be an especially meaningful syntax.
This example is incomplete; if you add the line m2 + m1, then try to display
m2, you’ll get a stack overflow (can you fix the problem?).

Equality
Invoking == (equality) or != (inequality) calls the equals() member
function. data classes automatically redefine equals() to compare the
stored data, but if you don’t redefine equals() for non-data classes, the
default version compares references rather than contents:
// OperatorOverloading/DefaultEquality.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
class A(val i: Int)
data class D(val i: Int)
fun main() {
// Normal class:
val a = A(1)
val b = A(1)
val c = a
(a == b) eq false
(a == c) eq true
// Data class:
val d = D(1)
val e = D(1)
(d == e) eq true
}

a and b refer to different objects in memory, so the references are different
and a == b is false, even though the two objects store identical data. a and
c refer to the same object in memory, so comparing them produces true.
Because the data class D automatically generates an equals() that looks
at the contents of D, d == e produces true.
equals() is the only operator that cannot be an extension function; it must
be overridden as a member function. When defining your own equals(),
you are overriding the default equals(other: Any?). Notice that the type
of other is Any? rather than the specific type of your class. This allows you

to compare your type with other types, which means you must choose the
types allowed for comparison:
// OperatorOverloading/DefiningEquality.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
class E(var v: Int) {
override fun equals(other: Any?) = when {
this === other -> true
// [1]
other !is E -> false
// [2]
else -> v == other.v
// [3]
}
override fun hashCode(): Int = v
override fun toString() = "E($v)"
}
fun main() {
val a = E(1)
val b = E(2)
(a == b) eq false
// a.equals(b)
(a != b) eq true
// !a.equals(b)
// Reference equality:
(E(1) === E(1)) eq false
}

[1] This is an optimization: if other refers to the same object in
memory, the result is automatically true. The triple equality symbol
=== tests for reference equality.
[2] This determines that the type of other must be the same as the
current type. For E to be compared to other types, add further match
expressions.
[3] This compares the stored data. At this point the compiler knows
that other is of type E, so we can access other.v without a cast.
When overriding equals() you should also override hashCode(). This is a
complex topic, but the basic rule is that if two objects are equal, they must
produce the same hashCode() value. Standard data structures like Map and
Set will fail without this rule. Things get even more complicated with an
open class because you must compare an instance with all possible
subclasses. You can learn more about the concept of hashing in Wikipedia.
Defining a proper equals() and hashCode() is beyond the scope of this
book—what we do here illustrates the concept and works for our simple
example but won’t work for more complicated cases. This complexity is the
reason that data classes create their own equals() and hashCode(). If you

must define your own equals() and hashCode(), we recommend
automatically generating them using IntelliJ IDEA or Android Studio with
the action Generate -> equals and hashCode.
When you compare nullable objects using ==, Kotlin enforces nullchecking. This can be achieved using either if or the Elvis operator:
// OperatorOverloading/EqualsForNullable.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
fun equalsWithIf(a: E?, b: E?) =
if (a === null)
b === null
else
a == b
fun equalsWithElvis(a: E?, b: E?) =
a?.equals(b) ?: (b === null)
fun main() {
val x: E? = null
val y = E(0)
val z: E? = null
(x == y) eq false
(x == z) eq true
equalsWithIf(x, y) eq false
equalsWithIf(x, z) eq true
equalsWithElvis(x, y) eq false
equalsWithElvis(x, z) eq true
}

equalsWithIf() first checks to see if the reference a is null, in which case
the only way the two can be equal is if the reference b is also null. If a is
not a null reference, the member equals() is used to compare the two.
equalsWithElvis() achieves the same effect, but more succinctly using
both ?. and ?:.

Arithmetic operators
We can define basic arithmetic operators as extensions to class E:
// OperatorOverloading/ArithmeticOperators.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
// Unary operators:
operator fun E.unaryPlus() = E(v)
operator fun E.unaryMinus() = E(-v)
operator fun E.not() = this

// Increment/decrement:
operator fun E.inc() = E(v + 1)
operator fun E.dec() = E(v - 1)
fun unary(a: E) {
+a
-a
!a

}

var b = a
b++
b--

// unaryPlus()
// unaryMinus()
// not()
// inc() (must be var)
// dec() (must be var)

// Binary operators:
operator fun E.plus(e: E) = E(v + e.v)
operator fun E.minus(e: E) = E(v - e.v)
operator fun E.times(e: E) = E(v * e.v)
operator fun E.div(e: E) = E(v % e.v)
operator fun E.rem(e: E) = E(v / e.v)
fun binary(a: E, b: E) {
a + b
// a.plus(b)
a - b
// a.minus(b)
a * b
// a.times(b)
a / b
// a.div(b)
a % b
// a.rem(b)
}
// Augmented assignment:
operator fun E.plusAssign(e: E) { v += e.v }
operator fun E.minusAssign(e: E) { v - e.v }
operator fun E.timesAssign(e: E) { v *= e.v }
operator fun E.divAssign(e: E) { v /= e.v }
operator fun E.remAssign(e: E) { v %= e.v }
fun assignment(a: E, b: E) {
a += b
// a.plusAssign(b)
a -= b
// a.minusAssign(b)
a *= b
// a.timesAssign(b)
a /= b
// a.divAssign(b)
a %= b
// a.remAssign(b)
}
fun main() {
val a = E(2)
val b = E(3)
a + b eq E(5)
a * b eq E(6)
val x = E(1)
x += b * b
x eq E(10)
}

When writing an extension, remember that the properties and functions of
the extended type are implicitly available. In the definition of unaryPlus(),
for example, the v in E(v) is the v property from the E that’s being
extended.

Note that x += e can be resolved to either x = x.plus(e) if x is a var or to
x.plusAssign(e) if x is val and the corresponding plusAssign() member
is available. If both options work, the compiler emits an error indicating
that it can’t choose.
The parameter can be of a different type than the type the operator extends.
Here, the + operator extension for E takes an Int parameter:
// OperatorOverloading/DifferentTypes.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
operator fun E.plus(i: Int) = E(v + i)
fun main() {
E(1) + 10 eq E(11)
}

Operator precedence is fixed, and is identical for both built-in types and
custom types. For example, multiplication has a higher precedence than
addition, and both have higher precedence than equality; thus 1 + 2 * 3
== 7 is true. You can find the operator precedence table in the
documentation.
Sometimes when you mix arithmetic and programming operators, the result
isn’t obvious. Here, we combine + and the Elvis operator:
// OperatorOverloading/ConfusingPrecedence.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val x: Int? = 1
val y: Int = 2
val sum = x ?: 0 + y
sum eq 1
(x ?: 0) + y eq 3
// [1]
x ?: (0 + y) eq 1
// [2]
}

In sum, + has higher precedence than the Elvis operator ?: so the result is
1?: (0 + 2) == 1. This might be not what the programmer intended.
When mixing different operations where precedence is not obvious, we
recommend adding parentheses as in lines [1] and [2].

Comparison

All comparison operations <, >, <=, >= are automatically available when you
define compareTo():
// OperatorOverloading/Comparison.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
operator fun E.compareTo(e: E): Int =
v.compareTo(e.v)
fun main() {
val a = E(2)
val b = E(3)
(a < b) eq true
(a > b) eq false
(a <= b) eq true
(a >= b) eq false
}

// a.compareTo(b) < 0
// a.compareTo(b) > 0
// a.compareTo(b) <= 0
// a.compareTo(b) >= 0

compareTo() must return an Int indicating:
0 if the elements are equal.

A positive value if the first element (the receiver) is bigger than the
second (the argument).
A negative value if the first element is smaller than the second.

Ranges and Containers
rangeTo() overloads the .. operator for creating ranges, while contains()

indicates whether a value is within a range:
// OperatorOverloading/Ranges.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
data class R(val r: IntRange) { // Range
override fun toString() = "R($r)"
}
operator fun E.rangeTo(e: E) = R(v..e.v)
operator fun R.contains(e: E): Boolean =
e.v in r
fun main() {
val a = E(2)
val b = E(3)
val r = a..b
(a in r) eq true
(a !in r) eq false
r eq R(2..3)
}

// a.rangeTo(b)
// r.contains(a)
// !r.contains(a)

Container Access
Overloading contains() allows you to check whether a value is in a
container, while get() and set() support reading and assigning elements in
a container using square brackets:
// OperatorOverloading/ContainerAccess.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
data class C(val c: MutableList<Int>) {
override fun toString() = "C($c)"
}
operator fun C.contains(e: E) = e.v in c
operator fun C.get(i: Int): E = E(c[i])
operator fun C.set(i: Int, e: E) {
c[i] = e.v
}
fun main() {
val c = C(mutableListOf(2, 3))
(E(2) in c) eq true // c.contains(E(2))
(E(4) in c) eq false // c.contains(E(4))
c[1] eq E(3)
// c.get(1)
c[1] = E(4)
// c.set(2, E(4))
c eq C(mutableListOf(2, 4))
}

In IntelliJ IDEA or Android Studio you can navigate to a declaration of a
function or a class from its usage. This also works with operators: you can
put the cursor on .. then navigate to its definition to see which operator
function is called.

Invoke
Placing parentheses after an object generates a call to invoke(), so the
invoke() operator makes an object look like a function. You can define
invoke() with any number of parameters:
// OperatorOverloading/Invoke.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
class Func {
operator fun invoke() = "invoke()"
operator fun invoke(i: Int) = "invoke($i)"
operator fun invoke(i: Int, j: String) =
"invoke($i, $j)"

}

operator fun invoke(
i: Int, j: String, k: Double
) = "invoke($i, $j, $k)"

fun main() {
val f = Func()
f() eq "invoke()"
f(22) eq "invoke(22)"
f(22, "Hi") eq "invoke(22, Hi)"
f(22, "Three", 3.1416) eq
"invoke(22, Three, 3.1416)"
}

You can also define invoke() with vararg to work with any number of
arguments of the same type (see Variable Argument Lists).
invoke() can be defined as an extension function. Here, it’s an extension
for String, taking a function as a parameter and calling that function on the
String:
// OperatorOverloading/StringInvoke.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
operator fun String.invoke(
f: (s: String) -> String
) = f(this)
fun main() {
"mumbling" { it.toUpperCase() } eq
"MUMBLING"
}

Because the lambda is the final invoke() argument, it can be called without
parentheses.
If you have a function reference, you can use it to call the function directly
using parentheses or via invoke():
// OperatorOverloading/InvokeFunctionType.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val func: (String) -> Int = { it.length }
func("abc") eq 3
func.invoke("abc") eq 3
val nullableFunc: ((String) -> Int)? = null
if (nullableFunc != null) {
nullableFunc("abc")
}

}

nullableFunc?.invoke("abc")

// [1]

[1] If a function reference is nullable, you can combine invoke() and
safe access.
The most common use for a custom invoke() is when creating DSLs.

Function Names in Backticks
Kotlin allows spaces, certain nonstandard characters, and reserved words in
a function name by placing that function name inside backticks:
// OperatorOverloading/Backticks.kt
package operatoroverloading
fun `A long name with spaces`() = Unit
fun `*how* is this working?`() = Unit
fun `'when' is a keyword`() = Unit
// fun `Illegal characters :<>`() = Unit
fun main() {
`A long name with spaces`()
`*how* is this working?`()
`'when' is a keyword`()
}

This can be particularly helpful for Unit Testing because you can create
readable test names that include details about those tests. It also simplifies
interactions with Java code.
You can easily create incomprehensible code:
// OperatorOverloading/Swearing.kt
package operatoroverloading
import atomictest.eq
infix fun String.`#!%`(s: String) =
"$this Rowzafrazaca $s"
fun main() {
"howdy" `#!%` "Ma'am!" eq
"howdy Rowzafrazaca Ma'am!"
}

Kotlin accepts this code, but what does it mean to the reader? Because code
is read much more than it is written, you should make your programs as
understandable as possible.
Operator overloading is not an essential feature, but is an excellent example
of how a language is more than just a way to manipulate the underlying
computer. The challenge is crafting the language to provide better ways to
express your abstractions, so humans have an easier time understanding the
code without getting bogged down in needless detail. It’s possible to define
operators in ways that obscure meaning, so tread carefully.
Everything is syntactic sugar. Toilet paper is syntactic sugar, and I still want
it.—Barry Hawkins
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Using Operators
In practice you rarely overload operators—usually only when you
create your own library.
However, you regularly use overloaded operators, often without noticing.
For example, the Kotlin standard library defines numerous operators that
improve your experience with collections. Here’s some familiar code seen
from a new angle:
// UsingOperators/NewAngle.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = MutableList(10) { 'a' + it }
list[7] eq 'h' // operator get()
list.get(8) eq 'i' // Explicit call
list[9] = 'x' // operator set()
list.set(9, 'x') // Explicit call
list[9] eq 'x'
('d' in list) eq true // operator contains()
list.contains('e') eq true // Explicit call
}

Accessing list elements using square brackets calls the overloaded operators
get() and set(), while in calls contains().
Calling += on a mutable collection modifies it, while calling + returns a new
collection containing the old elements together with the new element:
// UsingOperators/OperatorPlus.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val mutableList = mutableListOf(1, 2, 3)
mutableList += 4 // operator plusAssign()
mutableList.plusAssign(5) // Explicit
mutableList eq "[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]"
mutableList + 99 eq "[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 99]"
mutableList eq "[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]"
val list = listOf(1) // Read-only
val newList = list + 2 // operator plus()
list eq "[1]"
newList eq "[1, 2]"
val another = list.plus(3) // Explicit

}

another eq "[1, 3]"

Calling += on a read-only collection probably doesn’t produce what you
expect:
// UsingOperators/Unexpected.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
var list = listOf(1, 2)
list += 3 // Probably unexpected
list eq "[1, 2, 3]"
}

In a mutable collection, a += b calls plusAssign() to modify a. However,
plusAssign() is not available for read-only collections, so Kotlin rewrites
a += b into a = a + b. This calls plus(), which doesn’t change the
collection, but rather creates a new one and assigns the result to the var
list reference. The net effect is that a += b still produces the result we
expect for a—at least for simple types like Int.
// UsingOperators/ReadOnlyAndPlus.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
var list = listOf(1, 2)
val initial = list
list += 3
list eq "[1, 2, 3]"
list = list.plus(4)
list eq "[1, 2, 3, 4]"
initial eq "[1, 2]"
}

The last line shows that the initial collection remains unchanged.
Creating a new collection for every added element probably isn’t your
intent. The problem doesn’t arise if you use val for list instead of var
because calling += won’t compile. This is one more reason to use val by
default—only use var when necessary.
compareTo() was introduced as a standalone extension function in Operator

Overloading. However, you get greater benefits if your class implements
the Comparable interface and overrides its compareTo():
// UsingOperators/CompareTo.kt
package usingoperators

import atomictest.eq
data class Contact(
val name: String,
val mobile: String
): Comparable<Contact> {
override fun compareTo(
other: Contact
): Int = name.compareTo(other.name)
}
fun main() {
val alice = Contact("Alice", "0123456789")
val bob = Contact("Bob", "9876543210")
val carl = Contact("Carl", "5678901234")
(alice < bob) eq true
(alice <= bob) eq true
(alice > bob) eq false
(alice >= bob) eq false
val contacts = listOf(bob, carl, alice)
contacts.sorted() eq
listOf(alice, bob, carl)
contacts.sortedDescending() eq
listOf(carl, bob, alice)
}

Any two Comparables can be compared using <, <=, > and >= (note that ==
and != are not included). Kotlin doesn’t require the operator modifier
when overriding compareTo() because it has already been defined as an
operator in the Comparable interface.
Implementing Comparable also enables features like sortability, and
creating a range of instances without redefining the .. operator. You can
then check to see if a value is in that range:
// UsingOperators/ComparableRange.kt
package usingoperators
import atomictest.eq
class F(val i: Int): Comparable<F> {
override fun compareTo(other: F) =
i.compareTo(other.i)
}
fun main() {
val range = F(1)..F(7)
(F(3) in range) eq true
(F(9) in range) eq false
}

Prefer implementing Comparable. Only define compareTo() as an extension
function when using a class you have no control over.

Destructuring Operators
Another group of operators you don’t typically define is the componentN()
functions (component1(), component2() etc.), used for Destructuring
Declarations. In main(), Kotlin quietly generates calls to component1() and
component2() for the destructuring assignment:
// UsingOperators/DestructuringDuo.kt
package usingoperators
import atomictest.*
class Duo(val x: Int, val y: Int) {
operator fun component1(): Int {
trace("component1()")
return x
}
operator fun component2(): Int {
trace("component2()")
return y
}
}
fun main() {
val (a, b) = Duo(1, 2)
a eq 1
b eq 2
trace eq "component1() component2()"
}

The same approach works with Maps, which use an Entry type containing
component1() and component2() member functions:
// UsingOperators/DestructuringMap.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val map = mapOf("a" to 1)
for ((key, value) in map) {
key eq "a"
value eq 1
}
// The Destructuring assignment becomes:
for (entry in map) {
val key = entry.component1()
val value = entry.component2()
key eq "a"
value eq 1
}
}

You can use destructuring declarations with any data class because
componentN() functions are automatically generated:

// UsingOperators/DestructuringData.kt
package usingoperators
import atomictest.eq
data class Person(
val name: String,
val age: Int
) {
// Compiler generates:
// fun component1() = name
// fun component2() = age
}
fun main() {
val person = Person("Alice", 29)
val (name, age) = person
// The Destructuring assignment becomes:
val name_ = person.component1()
val age_ = person.component2()
name eq "Alice"
age eq 29
name_ eq "Alice"
age_ eq 29
}

Kotlin generates a componentN() function for each property.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Property Delegation
A property can delegate its accessor logic.
You connect a property to a delegate with the by keyword:
val/var property by delegate

The delegate’s class must contain a getValue() function if the property is a
val (read only) or getValue() and setValue() functions if the property is
a var (read/write). First consider the read-only case:
// PropertyDelegation/BasicRead.kt
package propertydelegation
import atomictest.eq
import kotlin.reflect.KProperty
class Readable(val i: Int) {
val value: String by BasicRead()
}
class BasicRead {
operator fun getValue(
r: Readable,
property: KProperty<*>
) = "getValue: ${r.i}"
}
fun main() {
val x = Readable(11)
val y = Readable(17)
x.value eq "getValue: 11"
y.value eq "getValue: 17"
}

value in Readable is delegated to a BasicRead object. getValue() takes a
Readable parameter that allows it to access the Readable—when you say
by it binds the BasicRead to the whole Readable object. Notice that
getValue() accesses i in Readable.

Because getValue() returns a String, the type of value must also be
String.

The second getValue() parameter property is of the special type
KProperty, and this provides reflective information about the delegated
property.
If the delegated property is a var, it must handle both reading and writing,
so the delegate class requires both getValue() and setValue():
// PropertyDelegation/BasicReadWrite.kt
package propertydelegation
import atomictest.eq
import kotlin.reflect.KProperty
class ReadWriteable(var i: Int) {
var msg = ""
var value: String by BasicReadWrite()
}
class BasicReadWrite {
operator fun getValue(
rw: ReadWriteable,
property: KProperty<*>
) = "getValue: ${rw.i}"
operator fun setValue(
rw: ReadWriteable,
property: KProperty<*>,
s: String
) {
rw.i = s.toIntOrNull() ?: 0
rw.msg = "setValue to ${rw.i}"
}
}
fun main() {
val x = ReadWriteable(11)
x.value eq "getValue: 11"
x.value = "99"
x.msg eq "setValue to 99"
x.value eq "getValue: 99"
}

The first two setValue() parameters are the same as getValue(), and the
third is the value on the right side of the =, which is what we want to set.
Both getValue() and setValue() must agree on the type that is read and
written, which in this case is String (the type of value in ReadWriteable).
Notice that setValue() accesses i in ReadWriteable, and also msg.
BasicRead.kt and BasicReadWrite.kt do not implement an interface. A

class can be used as a delegate if it simply conforms to the convention of
having the necessary function(s) with the necessary signature(s). However,

you can also implement the ReadOnlyProperty interface, as seen here in
BasicRead2:
// PropertyDelegation/BasicRead2.kt
package propertydelegation
import atomictest.eq
import kotlin.properties.ReadOnlyProperty
import kotlin.reflect.KProperty
class Readable2(val i: Int) {
val value: String by BasicRead2()
// SAM conversion:
val value2: String by
ReadOnlyProperty { _, _ -> "getValue: $i" }
}
class BasicRead2 :
ReadOnlyProperty<Readable2, String> {
override operator fun getValue(
thisRef: Readable2,
property: KProperty<*>
) = "getValue: ${thisRef.i}"
}
fun main() {
val x = Readable2(11)
val y = Readable2(17)
x.value eq "getValue: 11"
x.value2 eq "getValue: 11"
y.value eq "getValue: 17"
y.value2 eq "getValue: 17"
}

Implementing ReadOnlyProperty communicates to the reader that
BasicRead2 can be used as a delegate and ensures a proper getValue()
definition.
Because ReadOnlyProperty has only a single member function (and it has
been defined as a fun interface in the standard library), value2 is defined
much more succinctly using a SAM conversion.
BasicReadWrite.kt can be modified to implement ReadWriteProperty,
ensuring proper getValue() and setValue() definitions:
// PropertyDelegation/BasicReadWrite2.kt
package propertydelegation
import atomictest.eq
import kotlin.properties.ReadWriteProperty
import kotlin.reflect.KProperty
class ReadWriteable2(var i: Int) {
var msg = ""

}

var value: String by BasicReadWrite2()

class BasicReadWrite2 :
ReadWriteProperty<ReadWriteable2, String> {
override operator fun getValue(
rw: ReadWriteable2,
property: KProperty<*>
) = "getValue: ${rw.i}"
override operator fun setValue(
rw: ReadWriteable2,
property: KProperty<*>,
s: String
) {
rw.i = s.toIntOrNull() ?: 0
rw.msg = "setValue to ${rw.i}"
}
}
fun main() {
val x = ReadWriteable2(11)
x.value eq "getValue: 11"
x.value = "99"
x.msg eq "setValue to 99"
x.value eq "getValue: 99"
}

Thus, a delegate class must contain either or both of the following
functions, which are called when the delegated property is accessed:
1. For reading:
operator fun getValue(thisRef: T, property: KProperty<*>):
V

2. For writing:
setValue(thisRef: T, property: KProperty<*>, value: V)

If the delegated property is a val, only the first function is required and
ReadOnlyProperty can be implemented using a SAM conversion.
The parameters are:
thisRef: T points to the delegate object, where T is the type of that
delegate. If you don’t want to use thisRef in the function, you can
effectively disable it by using Any? for T.
property: KProperty<*> provides information about the property
itself. The most commonly-used is name, which produces the field

name of the delegated property.
value is the value stored by setValue() into the delegated property. V
is the type of that property.
getValue() and setValue() can either be defined by convention, or written
as implementations of ReadOnlyProperty or ReadWriteProperty.

To enable access to private elements, nest the delegate class:
// PropertyDelegation/Accessibility.kt
package propertydelegation
import atomictest.eq
import kotlin.properties.ReadOnlyProperty
import kotlin.reflect.KProperty
class Person(
private val first: String,
private val last: String
) {
val name by
// SAM conversion:
ReadOnlyProperty<Person, String> { _, _ ->
"$first $last"
}
}
fun main() {
val alien = Person("Floopy", "Noopers")
alien.name eq "Floopy Noopers"
}

Assuming adequate access to the elements in the delegating class,
getValue() and setValue() can be written as extension functions:
// PropertyDelegation/Add.kt
package propertydelegation2
import atomictest.eq
import kotlin.reflect.KProperty
class Add(val a: Int, val b: Int) {
val sum by Sum()
}
class Sum
operator fun Sum.getValue(
thisRef: Add,
property: KProperty<*>
) = thisRef.a + thisRef.b
fun main() {
val addition = Add(144, 12)
addition.sum eq 156
}

This way you can use an existing class that you are unable to modify or
inherit and still delegate a property with it.
Here, when you set the value of the property, the number stored is the
Fibonacci number for that value, using the fibonacci() function from the
Recursion atom:
// PropertyDelegation/FibonacciProperty.kt
package propertydelegation
import kotlin.properties.ReadWriteProperty
import kotlin.reflect.KProperty
import recursion.fibonacci
import atomictest.eq
class Fibonacci :
ReadWriteProperty<Any?, Long> {
private var current: Long = 0
override operator fun getValue(
thisRef: Any?,
property: KProperty<*>
) = current
override operator fun setValue(
thisRef: Any?,
property: KProperty<*>,
value: Long
) {
current = fibonacci(value.toInt())
}
}
fun main() {
var fib by Fibonacci()
fib eq 0L
fib = 22L
fib eq 17711L
fib = 90L
fib eq 2880067194370816120L
}

fib in main() is a local delegated property—it’s defined inside a function

rather than a class. A delegated property can also be defined at file scope.

ReadWriteProperty’s first generic argument can be Any? because we never
use it to access anything inside Fibonacci, which would require specific
type information. Instead we manipulate the current property as we can in

any member function.

In most of the examples we’ve seen so far, the first parameter of
getValue() and setValue() are of a specific type. Those delegates were
tied to that specific type. Sometimes it is possible to create a general-

purpose delegate by ignoring the first type as Any?. For example, suppose
we’d like to store each delegated String property in a text file named for
that property:
// PropertyDelegation/FileDelegate.kt
package propertydelegation
import kotlin.properties.ReadWriteProperty
import kotlin.reflect.KProperty
import checkinstructions.DataFile
class FileDelegate :
ReadWriteProperty<Any?, String> {
override fun getValue(
thisRef: Any?,
property: KProperty<*>
): String {
val file =
DataFile(property.name + ".txt")
return if (file.exists())
file.readText()
else ""
}
override fun setValue(
thisRef: Any?,
property: KProperty<*>,
value: String
) {
DataFile(property.name + ".txt")
.writeText(value)
}
}

This delegate only needs to interact with the file, and doesn’t need anything
through thisRef. We ignore thisRef by typing it as Any?, because Any? has
no interesting operations. We are interested in property.name, which is the
name of the field. Now we can automatically create a file associated with
each property and store that property’s data in that file:
// PropertyDelegation/Configuration.kt
package propertydelegation
import checkinstructions.DataFile
import atomictest.eq
class Configuration {
var user by FileDelegate()
var id by FileDelegate()
var project by FileDelegate()
}
fun main() {
val config = Configuration()
config.user = "Luciano"
config.id = "Ramalho47"
config.project = "MyLittlePython"
DataFile("user.txt").readText() eq "Luciano"

}

DataFile("id.txt").readText() eq "Ramalho47"
DataFile("project.txt").readText() eq
"MyLittlePython"

Because it can ignore the surrounding type, FileDelegate is reusable.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Property Delegation Tools
The standard library contains special property delegation operations.
Map is one of the few types in the Kotlin library that is preconfigured to be
used as a delegated property. A single Map can be used to store all the
properties in a class. Each property identifier becomes a String key for the

map, and the property’s type is captured in the associated value:
// DelegationTools/CarService.kt
package propertydelegation
import atomictest.eq
class Driver(
map: MutableMap<String, Any?>
) {
var name: String by map
var age: Int by map
var id: String by map
var available: Boolean by map
var coord: Pair<Double, Double> by map
}
fun main() {
val info = mutableMapOf<String, Any?>(
"name" to "Bruno Fiat",
"age" to 22,
"id" to "X97C111",
"available" to false,
"coord" to Pair(111.93, 1231.12)
)
val driver = Driver(info)
driver.available eq false
driver.available = true
info eq "{name=Bruno Fiat, age=22, " +
"id=X97C111, available=true, " +
"coord=(111.93, 1231.12)}"
}

Notice that the original Map info is modified when setting
driver.available = true. This works because the Kotlin standard library
contains Map extension functions getValue() and setValue() that enable
property delegation. These simplified versions show how they work:
// DelegationTools/MapAccessors.kt
package delegationtools

import kotlin.reflect.KProperty
operator fun MutableMap<String, Any>.getValue(
thisRef: Any?, property: KProperty<*>
): Any? {
return this[property.name]
}
operator fun MutableMap<String, Any>.setValue(
thisRef: Any?, property: KProperty<*>,
value: Any
) {
this[property.name] = value
}

To see the actual library definitions, put the cursor on the by keyword in
IntelliJ IDEA or Android Studio and invoke “Go to Declaration”.
Delegates.observable() observes modifications of a mutable property.

Here, we trace old and new values:

// DelegationTools/Team.kt
package delegationtools
import kotlin.properties.Delegates.observable
import atomictest.eq
class Team {
var msg = ""
var captain: String by observable("<0>") {
prop, old, new ->
msg += "${prop.name} $old to $new "
}
}
fun main() {
val team = Team()
team.captain = "Adam"
team.captain = "Amanda"
team.msg eq "captain <0> to Adam " +
"captain Adam to Amanda"
}

observable() takes two arguments:

1. The initial value for the property; "<0>" in this case.
2. A function which is the action to perform when the property is
modified. Here, we use a lambda. The function arguments are the
property being changed, the current value of that property, and the
value it’s being changed to.

Delegates.vetoable() allows you to prevent a change to a property if the
new property value doesn’t satisfy the given predicate. Here, aName()

insists that the team captain’s name begin with the letter “A”:
// DelegationTools/TeamWithTraditions.kt
package delegationtools
import atomictest.*
import kotlin.properties.Delegates
import kotlin.reflect.KProperty
fun aName(
property: KProperty<*>,
old: String,
new: String
) = if (new.startsWith("A")) {
trace("$old -> $new")
true
} else {
trace("Name must start with 'A'")
false
}
interface Captain {
var captain: String
}
class TeamWithTraditions : Captain {
override var captain: String
by Delegates.vetoable("Adam", ::aName)
}
class TeamWithTraditions2 : Captain {
override var captain: String
by Delegates.vetoable("Adam") {
_, old, new ->
if (new.startsWith("A")) {
trace("$old -> $new")
true
} else {
trace("Name must start with 'A'")
false
}
}
}
fun main() {
listOf(
TeamWithTraditions(),
TeamWithTraditions2()
).forEach {
it.captain = "Amanda"
it.captain = "Bill"
it.captain eq "Amanda"
}
trace eq """
Adam -> Amanda
Name must start with 'A'
Adam -> Amanda
Name must start with 'A'

}

"""

Delegates.vetoable() takes two arguments: the initial value for the
property, and an onChange() function, which is ::aName in this example.
onChange() takes three arguments: property: KProperty<*>, the old
value currently held by the property, and the new value being placed in the
property. The function returns a Boolean indicating whether the change is

successful or prevented.

TeamWithTraditions2 defines Delegates.vetoable() using a lambda
instead of the function aName().

The remaining tool in properties.Delegates is notNull(), which
produces a property that must be initialized before it can be read:
// DelegationTools/NeverNull.kt
package delegationtools
import atomictest.*
import kotlin.properties.Delegates
class NeverNull {
var nn: Int by Delegates.notNull()
}
fun main() {
val non = NeverNull()
capture {
non.nn
} eq "IllegalStateException: Property " +
"nn should be initialized before get."
non.nn = 11
non.nn eq 11
}

Trying to read non.nn before nn has been assigned a value produces an
exception. After nn has been assigned, you can successfully read it.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Lazy Initialization
So far, you’ve learned two ways to initialize properties.
1. Store the initial value at the point of definition, or in the constructor.
2. Define a custom getter that computes the property for each access.
This atom explores a third use case: costly initialization that you might not
need right away, or ever. For example:
Complex and time-consuming calculations
Network requests
Database access
This can produce two problems:
1. Long application start-up time.
2. Performing unnecessary work for a property that is never used, or that
can have delayed access.
This happens frequently enough that Kotlin includes a built-in solution. A
lazy property is initialized when it’s first used, rather than when it’s
created. If we never use a lazy property, it never performs that expensive
initialization.
The concept of lazy properties isn’t unique to Kotlin. Laziness can be
implemented within other languages, whether or not they provide direct
support. Kotlin provides a consistent, recognizable idiom for such
properties using property delegation. With a lazy property, by is followed
by a call to lazy():
val lazyProperty by lazy { initializer }

lazy() takes a lambda containing the initialization logic. As usual, the last

expression in the lambda becomes the result, which is assigned to the

property:
// LazyInitialization/LazySyntax.kt
package lazyinitialization
import atomictest.*
val idle: String by lazy {
trace("Initializing 'idle'")
"I'm never used"
}
val helpful: String by lazy {
trace("Initializing 'helpful'")
"I'm helping!"
}
fun main() {
trace(helpful)
trace eq """
Initializing 'helpful'
I'm helping!
"""
}

The idle property isn’t initialized because it’s never accessed.
Notice that both helpful and idle are vals. Without lazy initialization,
you’d be forced to make them vars, producing less-reliable code.
We can see all the work that lazy initialization does for you by
implementing the behavior for an Int property without it:
// LazyInitialization/LazyInt.kt
package lazyinitialization
import atomictest.*
class LazyInt(val init: () -> Int) {
private var helper: Int? = null
val value: Int
get() {
if (helper == null)
helper = init()
return helper!!
}
}
fun main() {
val later = LazyInt {
trace("Initializing 'later'")
5
}
trace("First 'value' access:")
trace(later.value)
trace("Second 'value' access:")
trace(later.value)

}

trace eq """
First 'value' access:
Initializing 'later'
5
Second 'value' access:
5
"""

The value property doesn’t store a value, but instead has a getter that
retrieves the value from the helper property. This is similar to the code
Kotlin generates for lazy.
Now we can compare the three ways to initialize a property—at the point of
definition, using a getter, and using lazy initialization:
// LazyInitialization/PropertyOptions.kt
package lazyinitialization
import atomictest.trace
fun compute(i: Int): Int {
trace("Compute $i")
return i
}
object Properties {
val atDefinition = compute(1)
val getter
get() = compute(2)
val lazyInit by lazy { compute(3) }
val never by lazy { compute(4) }
}
fun main() {
listOf(
Properties::atDefinition,
Properties::getter,
Properties::lazyInit
).forEach {
trace("${it.name}:")
trace("${it.get()}")
trace("${it.get()}")
}
trace eq """
Compute 1
atDefinition:
1
1
getter:
Compute 2
2
Compute 2
2
lazyInit:
Compute 3
3
3

}

"""

atDefinition is initialized when you create an instance of
Properties.

“Compute 1” appears before “atDefinition:” which shows that
initialization happens before any accesses.
getter is computed every time you access it. “Compute 2” appears
twice, once for each access to the property.
The initialization value for lazyInit is only calculated the first time it
is accessed. Initialization never happens if you don’t access that
property—notice that “Compute 4” never appears in the trace.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

Late Initialization
Sometimes you want to initialize properties of your class after it is
created, but in a separate member function instead of using lazy.
For example, a framework or library might require initialization in a special
function. If you extend that library class, you can provide your own
implementation of that special function.
Consider a Bag interface with a setUp() that initializes instances:
// LateInitialization/Bag.kt
package lateinitialization
interface Bag {
fun setUp()
}

Suppose we want to reuse a library that creates and manipulates Bags and
guarantees that setUp() is called. This library requires subclass
initialization in setUp() instead of in a constructor:
// LateInitialization/Suitcase.kt
package lateinitialization
import atomictest.eq
class Suitcase : Bag {
private var items: String? = null
override fun setUp() {
items = "socks, jacket, laptop"
}
fun checkSocks(): Boolean =
items?.contains("socks") ?: false
}
fun main() {
val suitcase = Suitcase()
suitcase.setUp()
suitcase.checkSocks() eq true
}

Suitcase initializes items by overriding setUp(). However, we can’t just
define items as a String—if we do that, we must provide a non-null

initializer in the constructor. Using a stub value such as an empty String is
a bad practice because you never know whether it’s actually been
initialized. null indicates that it’s not initialized.
Defining items as a nullable String? means we must check for null in all
member functions, as in checkSocks(). However, we know that the library
we’re reusing initializes items by calling setUp(), so the null checks
should not be necessary.
The lateinit property modifier fixes this problem—here, we initialize
items after creating an instance of BetterSuitcase:
// LateInitialization/BetterSuitcase.kt
package lateinitialization
import atomictest.eq
class BetterSuitcase : Bag {
lateinit var items: String
override fun setUp() {
items = "socks, jacket, laptop"
}
fun checkSocks() = "socks" in items
}
fun main() {
val suitcase = BetterSuitcase()
suitcase.setUp()
suitcase.checkSocks() eq true
}

Compare this version of checkSocks() with the one in Suitcase.kt.
lateinit means items is safely defined as a non-nullable property.
lateinit can be used on a property inside the body of a class, a top-level
property, or local var.

Limitations:
lateinit can only be used on a var property, not a val.

The property must be a non-nullable type.
The property cannot be a primitive type.
lateinit is not allowed for abstract properties in an abstract class
or interface.
lateinit is not allowed for properties with a custom get() or set().

What happens if you forget to initialize such a property? You won’t get
compile-time errors or warnings, because the initialization logic might be
complex and depend on other properties that Kotlin can’t monitor:
// LateInitialization/FaultySuitcase.kt
package lateinitialization
import atomictest.*
class FaultySuitcase : Bag {
lateinit var items: String
override fun setUp() {}
fun checkSocks() = "socks" in items
}
fun main() {
val suitcase = FaultySuitcase()
suitcase.setUp()
capture {
suitcase.checkSocks()
} eq
"UninitializedPropertyAccessException" +
": lateinit property items " +
"has not been initialized"
}

This runtime exception has enough detail for you to easily discover and fix
the problem. Tracking down an error reported by a null pointer exception
is usually much more difficult.
.isInitialized will tell you whether a lateinit property been initialized.
The property must be in your current scope, and is accessed using the ::

operator:

// LateInitialization/IsInitialized.kt
package lateinitialization
import atomictest.*
class WithLate {
lateinit var x: String
fun status() = "${::x.isInitialized}"
}
lateinit var y: String
fun main() {
trace("${::y.isInitialized}")
y = "Ready"
trace("${::y.isInitialized}")
val withlate = WithLate()
trace(withlate.status())
withlate.x = "Set"
trace(withlate.status())
trace eq "false true false true"
}

Although you can create a local lateinit var, you cannot call
.isInitialized on it because references to local vars or vals are not
supported.
Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.

APPENDICES

Appendix A: AtomicTest
This minimal test framework is used to validate the book examples. It
also helps introduce and promote unit testing early in the learning
process.
This framework is described in the following atoms:
Testing introduces the framework and describes the eq and neq
functions and the trace object.
Exceptions introduces the capture() function.
Exception Handling describes the capture() function implementation.
Unit Testing uses AtomicTest to help introduce the concept of unit
testing.
// AtomicTest/AtomicTest.kt
package atomictest
import kotlin.math.abs
import kotlin.reflect.KClass
const val ERROR_TAG = "[Error]: "
private fun <L, R> test(
actual: L,
expected: R,
checkEquals: Boolean = true,
predicate: () -> Boolean
) {
println(actual)
if (!predicate()) {
print(ERROR_TAG)
println("$actual " +
(if (checkEquals) "!=" else "==") +
" $expected")
}
}
/**
* Compares the string representation
* of this object with the string `rval`.
*/
infix fun Any.eq(rval: String) {
test(this, rval) {
toString().trim() == rval.trimIndent()
}
}

/**
* Verifies this object is equal to `rval`.
*/
infix fun <T> T.eq(rval: T) {
test(this, rval) {
this == rval
}
}
/**
* Verifies this object is != `rval`.
*/
infix fun <T> T.neq(rval: T) {
test(this, rval, checkEquals = false) {
this != rval
}
}
/**
* Verifies that a `Double` number is equal
* to `rval` within a positive delta.
*/
infix fun Double.eq(rval: Double) {
test(this, rval) {
abs(this - rval) < 0.0000001
}
}
/**
* Holds captured exception information:
*/
class CapturedException(
private val exceptionClass: KClass<*>?,
private val actualMessage: String
) {
private val fullMessage: String
get() {
val className =
exceptionClass?.simpleName ?: ""
return className + actualMessage
}
infix fun eq(message: String) {
fullMessage eq message
}
infix fun contains(parts: List<String>) {
if (parts.any { it !in fullMessage }) {
print(ERROR_TAG)
println("Actual message: $fullMessage")
println("Expected parts: $parts")
}
}
override fun toString() = fullMessage
}
/**
* Captures an exception and produces
* information about it. Usage:
*
capture {
*
// Code that fails
*
} eq "FailureException: message"

*/
fun capture(f:() -> Unit): CapturedException =
try {
f()
CapturedException(null,
"$ERROR_TAG Expected an exception")
} catch (e: Throwable) {
CapturedException(e::class,
(e.message?.let { ": $it" } ?: ""))
}
/**
* Accumulates output when called as in:
*
trace("info")
*
trace(object)
* Later compares accumulated to expected:
*
trace eq "expected output"
*/
object trace {
private val trc = mutableListOf<String>()
operator fun invoke(obj: Any?) {
trc += obj.toString()
}
/**
* Compares trc contents to a multiline
* `String` by ignoring white space.
*/
infix fun eq(multiline: String) {
val trace = trc.joinToString("\n")
val expected = multiline.trimIndent()
.replace("\n", " ")
test(trace, multiline) {
trace.replace("\n", " ") == expected
}
trc.clear()
}
}

Appendix B: Java Interoperability
This appendix describes issues and techniques for interfacing between
Kotlin and Java.
An essential Kotlin design goal is to create a seamless experience for Java
programmers. If you want to slowly migrate to Kotlin, you can easily start
by sprinkling bits of Kotlin into your existing Java project. This way you
can write new Kotlin code atop your Java base, benefiting from Kotlin
language features without being forced to rewrite Java code when it doesn’t
make sense.
Not only is it easy to call Java code from Kotlin, it’s also straightforward to
call Kotlin code within a Java program.

Calling Java from Kotlin
To use a Java class from Kotlin, import it, create an instance, and call a
function, just as you would in Java. Here, we use java.util.Random():
// interoperability/Random.kt
import atomictest.eq
import java.util.Random
fun main() {
val rand = Random(47)
rand.nextInt(100) eq 58
}

As with creating any instance in Kotlin, you don’t need Java’s new. A class
from a Java library works like a native Kotlin class.
JavaBean-style getters and setters in a Java class become properties in
Kotlin:
// interoperability/Chameleon.java
package interoperability;
import java.io.Serializable;

public
class Chameleon implements Serializable {
private int size;
private String color;
public int getSize() {
return size;
}
public void setSize(int newSize) {
size = newSize;
}
public String getColor() {
return color;
}
public void setColor(String newColor) {
color = newColor;
}
}

When working with Java, the package name must be identical (including
case) to the directory name. Java package names typically contain only
lowercase letters. To conform to this convention, this appendix uses only
lowercase letters in the interoperability example subdirectory name.
The imported Chameleon class works like a Kotlin class with properties:
// interoperability/UseBeanClass.kt
import interoperability.Chameleon
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val chameleon = Chameleon()
chameleon.size = 1
chameleon.size eq 1
chameleon.color = "green"
chameleon.color eq "green"
chameleon.color = "turquoise"
chameleon.color eq "turquoise"
}

Extension functions are especially helpful when you use an existing Java
library that lacks needed member functions. For example, we can add an
adjustToTemperature() operation to Chameleon:
// interoperability/ExtensionsToJavaClass.kt
package interop
import interoperability.Chameleon
import atomictest.eq
fun Chameleon.adjustToTemperature(
isHot: Boolean
) {
color = if (isHot) "grey" else "black"
}

fun main() {
val chameleon = Chameleon()
chameleon.size = 2
chameleon.size eq 2
chameleon.adjustToTemperature(isHot = true)
chameleon.color eq "grey"
}

The Kotlin standard library contains many extensions for classes from the
Java standard library such as List and String.

Calling Kotlin from Java
Kotlin produces libraries that are usable from Java. For the Java
programmer, a Kotlin library looks like a Java library.
Because everything in Java is a class, let’s start with a Kotlin class
containing a property and a function:
// interoperability/KotlinClass.kt
package interop
class Basic {
var property1 = 1
fun value() = property1 * 10
}

If you import this class into Java, it looks like an ordinary Java class:
// interoperability/UsingKotlinClass.java
package interoperability;
import interop.Basic;
import static atomictest.AtomicTestKt.eq;
public class UsingKotlinClass {
public static void main(String[] args) {
Basic b = new Basic();
eq(b.getProperty1(), 1);
b.setProperty1(12);
eq(b.value(), 120);
}
}

property1 becomes a private field containing JavaBean-style getters and
setters. The value() member function becomes a Java method with the

same name.

We have also imported AtomicTest, which requires additional ceremony in
Java: we must import it using the static keyword and give the package

name. eq() can only be called as an ordinary function because Java doesn’t
support infix notation.
If a Kotlin class is in the same package as Java code, you don’t need to
import it:
// interoperability/KotlinDataClass.kt
package interoperability
data class Staff(
var name: String,
var role: String
)

data classes generate extra member functions like equals(), hashCode()
and toString(), all of which work seamlessly within Java. At the end of
main(), we verify the implementations of equals() and hashCode() by
placing a Data object into a HashMap, then retrieving it:
// interoperability/UseDataClass.java
package interoperability;
import java.util.HashMap;
import static atomictest.AtomicTestKt.eq;
public class UseDataClass {
public static void main(String[] args) {
Staff e = new Staff(
"Fluffy", "Office Manager");
eq(e.getRole(), "Office Manager");
e.setName("Uranus");
e.setRole("Assistant");
eq(e,
"Staff(name=Uranus, role=Assistant)");
// Call copy() from the data class:
Staff cf = e.copy("Cornfed", "Sidekick");
eq(cf,
"Staff(name=Cornfed, role=Sidekick)");

}

}

HashMap<Staff, String> hm =
new HashMap<>();
// Employees work as hash keys:
hm.put(e, "Cheerful");
eq(hm.get(e), "Cheerful");

If you use the command line to run Java code that incorporates Kotlin code,
you must include kotlin-runtime.jar as a dependency, otherwise you’ll
get runtime exceptions complaining that some of the library utility classes
are not found. IntelliJ IDEA automatically includes kotlin-runtime.jar.

Kotlin top-level functions map to static methods in a Java class that takes
its name from the Kotlin file:
// interoperability/TopLevelFunction.kt
package interop
fun hi() = "Hello!"

To import, specify the class name generated by Kotlin. This name must also
be used when calling the static method:
// interoperability/CallTopLevelFunction.java
package interoperability;
import interop.TopLevelFunctionKt;
import static atomictest.AtomicTestKt.eq;
public class CallTopLevelFunction {
public static void main(String[] args) {
eq(TopLevelFunctionKt.hi(), "Hello!");
}
}

If you don’t want to qualify hi() with the package name, use import
static as we do with AtomicTest:
// interoperability/CallTopLevelFunction2.java
package interoperability;
import static interop.TopLevelFunctionKt.hi;
import static atomictest.AtomicTestKt.eq;
public class CallTopLevelFunction2 {
public static void main(String[] args) {
eq(hi(), "Hello!");
}
}

If you don’t like the class name generated by Kotlin, you can change it
using the @JvmName annotation:
// interoperability/ChangeName.kt
@file:JvmName("Utils")
package interop
fun salad() = "Lettuce!"

Now instead of ChangeNameKt, we use Utils:
// interoperability/MakeSalad.java
package interoperability;
import interop.Utils;
import static atomictest.AtomicTestKt.eq;

public class MakeSalad {
public static void main(String[] args) {
eq(Utils.salad(), "Lettuce!");
}
}

You can find further details in the documentation.

Adapting Java to Kotlin
One of Kotlin’s design goals is to take an existing Java type and adapt it to
your needs. This ability is not restricted to library designers—the same
logic can be applied to any external code base.
In Recursion, we created Fibonacci.kt to efficiently produce Fibonacci
numbers. That implementation is limited by the size of the Long it returns.
If you’d like to return larger values, the Java standard library includes the
BigInteger class. A few lines of code morphs BigInteger into something
that feels like a native Kotlin class:
// interoperability/BigInt.kt
package biginteger
import java.math.BigInteger
fun Int.toBigInteger(): BigInteger =
BigInteger.valueOf(toLong())
fun String.toBigInteger(): BigInteger =
BigInteger(this)
operator fun BigInteger.plus(
other: BigInteger
): BigInteger = add(other)

The toBigInteger() extension functions converts any Int or String to a
BigInteger by calling the BigInteger constructor and passing the receiver
string as an argument.
Overloading the operator BigInteger.plus() allows you to write number +
other. This makes working with BigInteger enjoyable compared to Java’s
clumsy number.plus(other).
Using BigInteger, Recursion/Fibonacci.kt easily converts to produce
much larger results:

// interoperability/BigFibonacci.kt
package interop
import atomictest.eq
import java.math.BigInteger
import java.math.BigInteger.ONE
import java.math.BigInteger.ZERO
fun fibonacci(n: Int): BigInteger {
tailrec fun fibonacci(
n: Int,
current: BigInteger,
next: BigInteger
): BigInteger {
if (n == 0) return current
return fibonacci(
n - 1, next, current + next)
}
return fibonacci(n, ZERO, ONE)
}

// [1]

fun main() {
(0..7).map { fibonacci(it) } eq
"[0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13]"
fibonacci(22) eq 17711.toBigInteger()
fibonacci(150) eq
"9969216677189303386214405760200"
.toBigInteger()
}

All Longs were replaced with BigInteger. In main(), you see both Int and
String converted to BigInteger using different toBigInteger() extension
properties. In line [1] we use the plus operator to find the sum current +
next; this is identical to the original version using Long.
fibonacci(150) overflows the Recursion/Fibonacci.kt version, but
works fine after the conversion to BigInteger.

Java Checked Exceptions & Kotlin
Java was predominantly patterned after the C++ language, which allowed
you to specify the exceptions that a function might throw. The Java
designers decided to go one step further and force anyone calling that
function to catch every specified exception. This seemed like a good idea at
the time, and thus was born checked exceptions—an experiment that, to our
knowledge, has not been repeated in subsequent programming languages.
Here’s how Java forces you to catch checked exceptions in the process of
opening, reading and closing a file. We only provide the basics to show the

checked exceptions; you must actually write more complex code to
correctly solve this problem in Java:
// interoperability/JavaChecked.java
package interoperability;
import java.io.*;
import java.nio.file.*;
import static atomictest.AtomicTestKt.eq;
public class JavaChecked {
// Build path to current source file, based
// on directory where Gradle is invoked:
static Path thisFile = Paths.get(
"DataFiles", "file_wubba.txt");
public static void main(String[] args) {
BufferedReader source = null;
try {
source = new BufferedReader(
new FileReader(thisFile.toFile()));
} catch(FileNotFoundException e) {
// Recover from file-open error
}
try {
String first = source.readLine();
eq(first, "wubba lubba dub dub");
} catch(IOException e) {
// Recover from read() error
}
try {
source.close();
} catch(IOException e) {
// Recover from close() error
}
}
}

Each of the above operations involves checked exceptions and must be
placed inside a try block or Java produces compile-time errors for
uncaught exceptions.
The only reason to catch an exception is if you can somehow recover from
the problem. If it’s not something you can fix, there’s no point in writing a
catch clause for that exception—just let it become an error report. In the
above examples, recovery from the errors seems dubious, but you’re still
forced to write the try-catch blocks.
Let’s rewrite this example in Kotlin:
// interoperability/KotlinChecked.kt
import atomictest.eq
import java.io.File

fun main() {
File("DataFiles/file_wubba.txt")
.readLines()[0] eq
"wubba lubba dub dub"
}

Kotlin allows us to reduce the operation to a single line of code because it
adds extension functions to the Java File class. At the same time, Kotlin
eliminates the checked exceptions. If we wanted, we could surround
intermediate operations with try-catch blocks, but Kotlin does not enforce
checked exceptions. This provides error reporting without compelling you
to write the additional noisy code.
Java libraries often use checked exceptions in situations that are outside the
programmer’s control and are typically unrecoverable. In these cases, it’s
best to catch the exception at the top level and restart the process, if
possible. Requiring all intermediate levels to pass the exception only adds
cognitive overhead when trying to understand the code.
If you’re writing Kotlin code that is called from Java and you must specify
a checked exception, Kotlin provides the @Throws annotation to give this
information to the Java caller:
// interoperability/AnnotateThrows.kt
package interop
import java.io.IOException
@Throws(IOException::class)
fun hasCheckedException() {
throw IOException()
}

Here’s how hasCheckedException() is called from Java:
// interoperability/CatchChecked.java
package interoperability;
import interop.AnnotateThrowsKt;
import java.io.IOException;
import static atomictest.AtomicTestKt.eq;
public class CatchChecked {
public static void main(String[] args) {
try {
AnnotateThrowsKt.hasCheckedException();
} catch(IOException e) {
eq(e, "java.io.IOException");
}
}
}

If you don’t handle the exception, the Java compiler issues an error
message.
Although Kotlin includes language support for exception handling, it tends
to emphasize error reporting and reserves exception handling for those rare
situations where you can actually recover from a problem (almost
exclusively I/O operations).

Nullable Types & Java
Kotlin ensures that pure Kotlin code has no null errors, but when you call
into Java, you have no such guarantees. In the following Java code, get()
sometimes returns null:
// interoperability/JTool.java
package interoperability;
public class JTool {
public static JTool get(String s) {
if(s == null) return null;
return new JTool();
}
public String method() {
return "Success";
}
}

To use JTool within Kotlin, you must know how get() behaves. You have
three choices, shown here in the definitions of a, b and c:
// interoperability/PlatformTypes.kt
package interop
import interoperability.JTool
import atomictest.eq
object KotlinCode {
val a: JTool? = JTool.get("")
val b: JTool = JTool.get("")
val c = JTool.get("")
}
fun main() {
with(KotlinCode) {
a?.method() eq "Success"
b.method() eq "Success"
c.method() eq "Success"
::a.returnType eq
"interoperability.JTool?"
::b.returnType eq
"interoperability.JTool"
::c.returnType eq

// [1]
// [2]
// [3]

// [4]
// [5]

}

}

"interoperability.JTool!"

// [6]

[1] Specify the type as nullable.
[2] Specify the type as non-nullable.
[3] Use type inference.
The with() in main() allows us to refer to a, b and c without the
KotlinCode qualification. Because the identifiers are inside an object, we
can use member reference syntax and the returnType property to determine
their types.
To initialize a, b and c, we pass a non-null String to get(), so a, b and c
all end up with non-null references and each one can successfully call
method().
[4] Because a is nullable, it must use ?. during member function calls.
[5] c behaves like a non-nullable reference and can be dereferenced
without any additional checks.
[6] Notice that c returns neither a nullable type nor a non-nullable
type, but something entirely different: JTool!.
Type! is Kotlin’s platform type, and has no notation—you can’t write it into

your code. It is used whenever Kotlin must infer a type outside its domain.

If a type comes from Java, accessing it can produce a null pointer
exception (NPE). Here’s what happens when JTool.get() returns a null
reference:
// interoperability/NPEOnPlatformType.kt
import interoperability.JTool
import atomictest.*
fun main() {
val xn: JTool? = JTool.get(null)
xn?.method() eq null

// [1]

val yn = JTool.get(null)
// [2]
yn?.method() eq null
// [3]
capture {
yn.method()
// [4]
} contains listOf("NullPointerException")
capture {

}

val zn: JTool = JTool.get(null) // [5]
} eq "NullPointerException: " +
"JTool.get(null) must not be null"

When you call a Java method like JTool.get() inside Kotlin, its return
value (unless annotated as explained in the next section) is a platform type,
which in this case is JTool!.
[1] Because xn is of the nullable type JTool?, it can successfully
receive a null. Assigning to a nullable type is safe, because Kotlin
forces you to test for null using ?. when calling method().
[2] At the point of definition, yn successfully receives the null without
complaint because Kotlin infers it to be the platform type JTool!.
[3] You can dereference yn by using a safe-access call ?., which in this
case returns null.
[4] However, using ?. is not required. You can simply dereference yn.
In this case you get a NullPointerException without any helpful
message.
[5] Assigning to a non-nullable type can produce an NPE. Kotlin
checks for nullity at the point of assignment. The initialization of zn
fails because the declared type JTool promises that zn is not nullable,
but it receives a null which produces a NullPointerException, this
time with a helpful message.
The exception message contains detailed information about the expression
that produced the null: NullPointerException: JTool.get(null) must
not be null. Even though it’s a runtime exception, the comprehensive
error message makes the problem much easier than fixing a regular NPE.
A platform type contains the least amount of information available for that
type. In this case, it only tells you that the type is JTool. It might or might
not be nullable—when using an inferred platform type you simply don’t
know.
You can’t explicitly declare a platform type (e.g. JTool!). You can only
observe a platform type in error messages, or when you display the inferred
type as in PlatformTypes.kt, or by checking the type within the IDE.

When working on a mixed Kotlin and Java project, you may or may not
have control over the Java code base. When using an external Java library,
you can’t modify the source code, so you must work with platform types.
Platform types provide seamless Java interoperability, and maintain the
consistency of type inference. However, don’t rely on them. The proper
strategy when calling un-annotated Java code is to avoid type inference, and
instead understand whether or not the code you are calling can produce
nulls.

Nullability Annotations
If you control the Java code base, you can add nullability annotations to the
Java code and avoid subtle NPE errors. @Nullable and @NotNull tell Kotlin
to treat a Java type as nullable or non-nullable, respectively. Here we add
Kotlin nullability annotations to JTool.java:
// interoperability/AnnotatedJTool.java
package interoperability;
import org.jetbrains.annotations.NotNull;
import org.jetbrains.annotations.Nullable;
public class AnnotatedJTool {
@Nullable
public static JTool
getUnsafe(@Nullable String s) {
if(s == null) return null;
return getSafe(s);
}
@NotNull
public static JTool
getSafe(@NotNull String s) {
return new JTool();
}
public String method() {
return "Success";
}
}

Applying an annotation to a Java parameter affects only that parameter.
Applying an annotation in front of a Java method modifies the return type.
When you call getUnsafe() and getSafe() in Kotlin, Kotlin treats the
AnnotatedJTool member functions as native Kotlin nullable or nonnullable:

// interoperability/AnnotatedJava.kt
package interop
import interoperability.AnnotatedJTool
import atomictest.eq
object KotlinCode2 {
val a = AnnotatedJTool.getSafe("")
// Doesn't compile:
// val b = AnnotatedJTool.getSafe(null)
val c = AnnotatedJTool.getUnsafe("")
val d = AnnotatedJTool.getUnsafe(null)
}
fun main() {
with(KotlinCode2) {
::a.returnType eq
"interoperability.JTool"
::c.returnType eq
"interoperability.JTool?"
::d.returnType eq
"interoperability.JTool?"
}
}

@NotNull JTool is transformed to Kotlin’s non-nullable type JTool, and
the annotated @Nullable JTool is transformed to Kotlin’s JTool?. You can
see this in the types shown in main() for a, c, and d.

You can’t pass a nullable argument when a non-nullable argument is
expected, even if it’s a Java type annotated with @NotNull, so Kotlin won’t
compile AnnotatedJTool.getSafe(null).
Different kinds of nullability annotations are supported, using different
names:
@Nullable and @CheckForNull are specified by the JSR-305 standard.
@Nullable and @NonNull are used in Android.
@Nullable and @NotNull are supported by JetBrains tools.

There are others. You can find the full list in the Kotlin documentation.
Kotlin detects default nullability annotations for a Java package or class, as
specified in the JSR-305 standard. If it’s @NotNull by default, you should
explicitly specify only @Nullable annotations. If it’s @Nullable by default,
you should explicitly specify only @NotNull annotations. The
documentation contains the technical details for choosing the default
annotation.

If you develop mixed Kotlin and Java projects, your applications will be
safer if you use nullability annotations in your Java code.

Collections & Java
This book doesn’t require Java knowledge. However, when you write code
in Kotlin for the Java Virtual Machine (JVM), it’s helpful to be familiar
with the Java standard collections library, because Kotlin uses it to create its
own collections.
The Java collections library is a set of classes and interfaces that implement
collection data structures, such as lists, sets and maps. These data structures
usually have clear and simple interfaces, but for speed may have
complicated implementations.
New languages typically create their own collections library from scratch.
For example, the Scala language has its own collections library which in
many ways surpasses the Java collections library, but also makes it more
challenging to mix Scala and Java.
Kotlin’s collections library is intentionally not rewritten from scratch.
Instead, it consists of improvements atop the Java collections library. For
example, when you create a mutable List, you’re actually using Java’s
ArrayList:
// interoperability/HiddenArrayList.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = mutableListOf(1, 2, 3)
list.javaClass.name eq
"java.util.ArrayList"
}

For seamless interoperability with Java code, Kotlin uses the interfaces
from the Java standard library, and often the same implementations. This
produces three benefits:
1. Kotlin code can easily mix with Java code. No additional conversion is
required when passing Kotlin collections to Java code.

2. Years of performance tuning in the Java standard library is
automatically available to Kotlin programmers.
3. The standard library included with a Kotlin application is small,
because it uses Java collections rather than defining its own. The
Kotlin standard library consists primarily of extension functions that
improve the Java collections.
Kotlin also fixes a design problem. In Java all collection interfaces are
mutable. For example, java.util.List has methods add() and remove()
that modify the List. As we’ve shown throughout this book, mutability is
the source of a significant number of programming problems. Thus, in
Kotlin, the default Collection type is read-only:
// interoperability/ReadOnlyByDefault.kt
package interop
data class Animal(val name: String)
interface Zoo {
fun viewAnimals(): Collection<Animal>
}
fun visitZoo(zoo: Zoo) {
val animals = zoo.viewAnimals()
// Compile-time error:
// animals.add(Animal("Grumpy Cat"))
}

Read-only collections are safer and more bug-free because they prevent
accidental modification.
Java provides a partial solution for collection immutability: when returning
a collection you can place it inside a special wrapper that throws an
exception for any attempt to modify the underlying collection. This doesn’t
produce static type checking, but can still prevent subtle bugs. However,
you must remember to wrap the collection to make it read-only, whereas in
Kotlin you must be explicit when you want a mutable collection.
Kotlin has separate interfaces for mutable and read-only collections:
Collection/MutableCollection
List/MutableList
Set/MutableSet

Map/MutableMap

These duplicate the interfaces from the Java standard library:
java.util.Collection
java.util.List
java.util.Set
java.util.Map

In Kotlin, as in Java, Collection is a supertype for both List and Set.
MutableCollection extends Collection and is a supertype of
MutableList and MutableSet. Here’s the basic structure:
// interoperability/CollectionStructure.kt
package collectionstructure
interface Collection<E>
interface List<E>: Collection<E>
interface Set<E>: Collection<E>
interface Map<K, V>
interface MutableCollection<E>
interface MutableList<E>:
List<E>, MutableCollection<E>
interface MutableSet<E>:
Set<E>, MutableCollection<E>
interface MutableMap<K, V>: Map<K, V>

For simplicity, we show only the names and not the full declarations from
the Kotlin standard library.
Kotlin mutable collections match their Java counterparts. If you compare
MutableCollection from kotlin.collections with java.util.List,
you’ll see that they declare the same member functions (methods, in Java
terminology). Kotlin’s Collection, List, Set and Map also duplicate Java’s
interfaces, but without any mutation methods.
Both kotlin.collections.List and kotlin.collections.MutableList
are visible from Java as java.util.List. These interfaces are special: they
exist only in Kotlin, but at the bytecode level they are both replaced with
Java’s List.
A Kotlin List can be cast to a Java List:

// interoperability/JavaList.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val list = listOf(1, 2, 3)
(list is java.util.List<*>) eq true
}

This code produces a warning:
This class shouldn’t be used in Kotlin.
Use kotlin.collections.List or kotlin.collections.MutableList instead.
This is a reminder to use Kotlin’s interfaces, not Java’s, when programming
in Kotlin.
Keep in mind that read-only is not the same as immutable. A collection
cannot be changed using a read-only reference, but it can still change:
// interoperability/ReadOnlyCollections.kt
import atomictest.eq
fun main() {
val mutable = mutableListOf(1, 2, 3)
// Read-only reference to a mutable list:
val list: List<Int> = mutable
mutable += 4
// list has changed:
list eq "[1, 2, 3, 4]"
}

Here, the read-only list references a MutableList, which can then be
changed by manipulating mutable. Because all Java collections are
mutable, Java code can modify a read-only Kotlin collection, even if you
pass it via a read-only reference.
Kotlin collections don’t produce full safety, but provide a good compromise
between having a better library and maintaining compatibility with Java.

Java Primitive Types
In Kotlin, you call a constructor to create an object, but in Java you must
use new to produce an object. new places the resulting object on the heap.
Such types are called reference types.

Creating objects on the heap can be inefficient for basic types such as
numbers. For these types, Java falls back on the approach taken by C and
C++: Instead of creating the variable using new, a non-reference
“automatic” variable is created that holds the value directly. Automatic
variables are placed on the stack, making them much more efficient. Such
types get special treatment by the JVM and are called primitive types.
There are a fixed number of primitive types: boolean, int, long, char,
byte, short, float and double. Primitive types always contain a non-null
value, and they can’t be used as generic arguments. If you need to store
null or use such types as generic arguments, you can use the corresponding
reference type defined in the Java standard library, such as
java.lang.Boolean or java.lang.Integer. These types are often called
wrapper types or boxed types to emphasize that they only wrap the
primitive value and store it on the heap.
// interoperability/JavaWrapper.java
package interoperability;
import java.util.*;
public class JavaWrapper {
public static void main(String[] args) {
// Primitive type
int i = 10;
// Wrapper types
Integer iOrNull = null;
List<Integer> list = new ArrayList<>();
}
}

Java distinguishes between reference types and primitive types, but Kotlin
does not. You use the same type Int both for defining an integer var/val or
using it as a generic argument. At the JVM level, Kotlin employs the same
primitive type support. When possible, Kotlin replaces Int with a primitive
int in the bytecode. A nullable Int? or Int used as a generic argument can
only be represented using the wrapper type:
// interoperability/KotlinWrapper.kt
package interop
fun main() {
// Generates a primitive int:
val i = 10
// Generates wrapper types:
val iOrNull: Int? = null

}

val list: List<Int> = listOf(1, 2, 3)

You normally don’t need to think much about whether primitives or
wrappers are generated by the Kotlin compiler, but it’s useful to know how
it’s implemented on the JVM.
The documentation explains more about the nuances of Kotlin/Java
interoperability.

